Bismillah Rahman Raheem, Alhamdulillahi Rabbil Alameen, SallAllahu Ala Saidna Muhammadu Ala Alihi wa Sahbijmain, Subhana Kala Ailmalana ilama Alamtuna Inna Kantal Alimul Hakeem, Allahuma Alimna ma'in Fauna Wan Fa'ana bimatu Alimuna wa zidna minfadlika'inna na ta'alima, Inna Ka'ala Kulishayn Qadira SallAllahu Ala Saidna Muhammadu Ala Alihi wa Sahbisalam, Asalamu Alaikum wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatu. Alhamdulillah, this is the third lesson for Imam Ghazali's Ayyuhul Walad or Dear Beloved Son or O Son, Explained Advice for Living Right, Alhamdulillah, in which he answers the question of one of his senior students, a scholar in his own right, as to which part of knowledge is the most important for the scholar and the students of knowledge to hold on to after everything they've studied. Which is it of the things that they've studied and learned in this deen that will take them to success in the hereafter and that they can hold on to. Imam Al-Hazali continues in his letter and in this section today he'll be speaking focusing on actions, the importance of action and their intentions. Last week we discussed the section where he started to speak about why actions are important with knowledge. So you have to have ilm but you have to have amal. and that knowledge without actions are actually a proof against you. And so he gave us the logical reasonings for why you need to apply knowledge in order for it to be beneficial. If you remember the stories about a person who gets attacked by a ferocious lion and have all kinds of weapons on them, but then they don't use those weapons. to defeat the lion. That's just like a person who has knowledge but then doesn't use it to ward off the evil that will come to them, right? So it doesn't help. Or someone who has a bunch of medicine and is ill and has to take that medicine but decides not to take that medicine. In the same way, knowledge is a shifa, knowledge is a medicine that cares us of our ignorance. So now Imam al-Ghazali will begin speaking about the textual proofs. So first he began with logical proofs. Now he's going to speak about textual proofs, Quran and Sunnah, to make his case. So he says, Ayuhulwalat, again starting with terms of endearment. And he keeps repeating this, almost every paragraph, he keeps saying, Ayuhulwalat, Ayuhulwalat, as if to remind his student and and all of us over and over and over again that he's speaking to us like a father speaks to their child with love and mercy and as a gentle reminder, not as a way of scolding them. You know, subhanAllah may Allah make us gentle parents as well. He says, Oh my beloved child or dear child, And even if you studied knowledge or read knowledge for 100 years and you gathered 1000 books, 1000 books, and this could be, when they talk about gathering 1000 books, whether you read them, whether you memorized them, whether you studied them deeply, whether you wrote books, whether you mastered those books, even if you did that for 100 years and gathered 1000 books to your name, you would not be ready nor would you be deserving of the mercy of Allah, Allah Most High. When it means accept how, accept how, accept. through your good deeds. So you could study for 100 years, right? These days, scholars, maybe you do four to five, six years as an undergraduate, let's say in an Islamic university, seven to eight years in a madrasa, a person who studied for longer might do 15 to 20 years, but how long would they do? And then a scholarly career might last for anywhere up to 50 years or more, but even if you studied for 100 years, if you didn't have actions and deeds to back up what you learned, then you would not be deserving of the Rahma of Allah. What does this mean? The Rahma of Allah here, we're talking about Allah's good pleasure. We're speaking about Allah's reward. We're speaking about Allah's saving one from the sins and from the difficulties that come when we don't protect ourselves with the deen. And what it means is that the mercy of Allah is so vast and generous But our own state, this is a statement of humility, our own state can be so fallen at times that we think that just by being who we are. You know, in our arrogance, we think that no matter how bad we are, that we deserve Jannah. And in this case, it's not the case. Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala is a transcendent, perfect being who deserves to be worshiped, right? So what have we done to prepare ourselves for this? That's what we could, even the average person could ask themselves that, then what should a scholar or a student of knowledge ask themselves and demand from themselves? And then he says, he says, just like how Allah has said, and now he's gonna go into, the Quranic proofs to bring ayat of Quran to show why it is that actions are essential to the idea of salvation. So he says, Allah says, and that each person will only have what they work towards. He's trying to prove something here. He's saying, look, Allah is saying they will only have what they work towards. And sa'i is like a labor or a toil or a struggle. And Allah says, ... And so Allah says, so whomever hopes for the meeting with their Lord, let them do good deeds. and associate none in the worship of their Lord. What does it mean to hope for the meeting with their Lord? It means to get Allah's good pleasure and to attain Allah's salvation and to reach Allah in a state where Allah you come to Allah with love and Allah brings you close to him with love, right? He is well pleased with them and they are well pleased with him. And so whoever hopes for that meeting, not hopes for the most money in the world, the best car, the most power, the most beautiful spouse, but whoever's working for Allah at the end of the day, at the end of the day, they want Allah's pleasure alone, then let them do good deeds. And this is the proof that he's bringing. So this idea of longing for Allah and loving Allah, sometimes there's a false spirituality that gets taken out of our scriptures because there's such a strong spiritual undercurrent in the Islamic sources. The idea of Islamic spirituality is so strong and latent as an undercurrent and even sometimes very obvious in many different ways that people begin to think that spirituality is something that is through emotions alone. or through states of the heart alone. And that deeds do not actually affect that. So you hear people ascribing themselves to spirituality, whether you want to call Tasqiya or Tasawwulf or whatever it is and saying, you know, I want to meet Allah. And so that hope alone, I'll live whatever life I want because I know that I'm sinful and this is my way of going towards Allah. And that is not acceptable in terms of leaving off good deeds. This is what Imam Ghazali is trying to say. And so as a condition for meeting Allah in his good pleasure, let them do good deeds and associate none in the worship of their Lord. So that last part is the one that establishes that you have to come to Allah as a monotheist in Islam, right? That you worship, you avoid shirk, that you worship none but Allah, obviously that is the qualifying condition, that's the shard. But then what makes you draw closer and closer and closer to that meeting with Allah, with acceptance? Then let them do good works. And Allah says, And Allah says, no soul can imagine what delights are kept in store for them as a reward for what they used to do. So here Allah is doing a like a tareeb, it's making us excited, making us long and look forward that no soul, right, can, there's no way they can know what exactly Allah has kept away hidden. And it's an implication in that ayah that the things of the next life, the rewards that Allah wants to give us, as we said before, The reason why Allah created the hereafter is because this world is not big enough to give all of the gifts that Allah wants to give to a sincere believer. And so Allah created a timeless eternal realm for us to be able to enjoy those things because this is the value of Iman, right? But for those who now we have that Allah has kept it hidden away and why is it hidden away, why is it hidden, why isn't it plain and obvious? Because if you were to put benefits and pleasures, eternal pleasures in front of anyone, they would strive for it and take it and there would be no sincerity in that, right? There would be no sincerity in that. But rather to hide those things from the view of someone, it tests their sincerity because now they have to ask themselves, do they believe? in the unseen Lord do they believe in the one true God and would they spend this time if they didn't have if they didn't get to see Allah for the period of their lifespan would they still work for Allah would they still do good would they still stay away from those wrong things so this is why Allah it's kept it hidden as a test for us as a reward for what they used to do and Allah uses when you say And then you use the Kana and then you use the present tense. It means it shows you feel it's just happening all the time. That person, what they do, they did works and works and works and works. Not that you say, oh, you know, like five Ramadans ago, I just prayed this amazing to Hajj, man, you should have seen it, right? And that's it. Or, oh yeah, I used to volunteer or I used to, I gave a huge donation like 10 years ago. and that's what I'm expecting is gonna take take me to Jannah and now I don't have to do anything I'm retired from doing good works no that's not how it works it's people who used to work time after time after time right and Allah also says Imam Alhazali continues to list Indeed those who have believed and done righteous deeds, they will have the gardens of Firdaws as a lodging, right? So here Allah is using emphasis, Inna, right? For Taqeed, it's emphasis. Then he combines Iman and Amal. So belief and righteous deeds and Allah repeats this over and over and over in the Quran. So that how does anyone, especially a person of knowledge, this is the thing, Imam Ghazali is not writing to the common person. even though it's a privilege that we're able to read this. He's talking to an halim. So how is it that an halim can't know this? It's not about book knowledge. He must have read these ayat millions of times, but it's because the nafs doesn't want to see that and the nafs doesn't want to act on it. So it's as though, unless you're looking at it with the heart like that, then it's as though you don't even know it's there because remember, you can memorize the entire Quran But if you're not acting on that Quran, it's as if you don't have the knowledge of it. Yes, you've read this many times, but Allah keeps telling you over and over, why does he keep saying it as a formula over and over when you have a child? Why is it that you tell them the same thing over and over and over, like a broken record? Because eventually you're trying to program them into something. In case they forget, you're always there to remind them, right? And just like when they become mature, then your parents don't need to tell you something anymore over and over and over. Or same with a teacher, they repeat a lesson until they think that you've learned it, right? And so Allah is saying, except those who believe and do righteous deeds, then they have Jannaatul Firdaws. Not just a Janna, but Jannaatul Firdaws, which is considered the in the center of Jannah. I mean, in one sense, the highest and in one sense, the middle. When the Arabs used to want to say something is very, very good, they would say it is the middle most, right? Because, you know, where are the buildings most expensive in a city, in the downtown core, right? Many times that's the most expensive real estate is in the most important parts. And so this is the very core of Jannah at the highest Jannah is Al-Firdous. And Allah is saying he will give that for them as a nuzul. Now there are, just as a side point, as a tangent, people translate nuzul and now taking this from a translation as a place to settle down, right, to come down. But a nuzul, as our teacher told us, as my Sheikh told me, is also when you have a guest come over, for example, like when you have a guest and they come to your house, what's the first thing that you do? You don't bring out the big meal, first thing you do is you bring out the dates or you bring out the cookies or the nuts, the small little snacks for them to just kind of snack on while you prepare the tea or whatever it is. That's just the entree, it's just the opening thing and so that All of these gardens and all of these delights are just a nuzul from Allah. They're just the first thing that Allah puts out for you. And that's the first thing that we can't even imagine how the delights that will be involved and that's just the first course. Then just imagine what the main meal will be, what the reward will be, right? Because we know that at the end of the day, what is the main, the greatest reward of Jannah is not Jannah, right? It's Allah himself. Look at your neighbor before looking at the house. The one who's living there is more important. When you go to a house, do I say I'm going to your house and I'm looking at the building? Am I going for the building or am I going to visit you? I'm going to visit you. So when you go to Jannah, are you going there for the pleasures? Are you going there for the gardens? No, you're going there for the one whose pleasure lies therein. whose face we want to look at on the day of judgment, right? And Allahu Akbar. So Allah combines actions and good deeds. Then Allah says, Imam al-Ghazali continues, ... ... And Allah says, and as for those who repent, they turn back to Allah from the wrong they were doing. They believe and do good deeds, they are the ones whose evil deeds Allah will change into good deeds. For Allah is all forgiving, all merciful. So here Allah combines three things, tawbah, returning back from your bad deeds and iman and good actions. as a way of attaining Allah's good pleasure. And so that tawbah is a very important element of that too. They say that this is the fuel of the spiritual path is tawbah. It's not being perfect. It's not in doing all the best things. We'll read a story coming up shortly about trying to be perfect or doing everything right. But if one doesn't have that tawbah or they're delaying that tawba, then even their Iman and their good deeds, they're not getting the full benefit from it. So the first turnaround and turn our lives around, then put our trust and faith in Allah and work righteous deeds. And so those are some of the ayahs, Allah also mentioned others. We did not put them up, they're very similar as a reward for that which they used to earn. right and a lot that we know that as well the prophet said . So somebody could say like the prophet said but none of you will enter paradise through his works. The prophet has said that and Imam Ghazali is aware of that hadith and he is aware that that objection will come. So how does he deal with that? And then Imam Ghazali continues and says, And what do you, oh student, my dear beloved son, Ayu al-Walat, say about this hadith? And then he quotes the hadith, What do you say about the hadith? That Islam is built on five pillars. , the bearing witness that there's no God except Allah. and that Muhammad is the messenger of Allah and establishing the prayer and giving charity and to fast Ramadan and to take a pilgrimage to Allah's sacred house for whomsoever can find a way there. So here Imam Ghazali is saying that Islam itself is built on these this one thing of saying a Shahada, but four types of worship of action, prayer, fasting, Zakat, Hajj. So what we know is when you say a pillar, right? It's as if you have like a chair, for example, or a table, right? You have four legs to that table. In this case, you have five. If you knock out a supporting pillar, something is gonna go off. And if you knock out more of them, the entire structure will fall and it won't be able to stand. And so the point he's making is if it is that Allah is saying that if you don't do these things, then Islam is not standing up, then how can you say that works don't matter? Then how can you think that just your knowledge is gonna save you? and faith iman continues is is verbal on your it is saying through the tongue and believing and affirming in the in the heart or in the mind and acting on on the limbs. So here Imam Al-Ghazali gives the definition of Iman or you could say a description of Iman according to how the Shafi'i scholars and the Muhaddithin and how they defined Iman as including the actions of the limbs. This is how he is defining Iman. We also know however that There were other scholars like Iman Abu Hanifa and others in the Aqidah scholars and other people who did tahqiq later on. And they said no, Iman is . It's expressed on the tongue but it's really about the heart. Is there a discrepancy? Is there really a discrepancy between those two? Because you hear people as well get into debates. these useless kind of internet debates, oh, is Iman include deeds or not include deeds. It's really a matter of perspective, but it comes down to the same thing. In the time of, as one of the Ulama of the past century said, that in the time of the scholars of Kalam, that there were people who said, there were groups and deviant sects who claimed that if you committed a major sin that it took you out of Islam. That anyone who commits a major sin that they would be in the Hellfire forever. And so this is incorrect. We know that Allah will can forgive any sin except for shirk. And so a major sin does not take you out of Islam. You don't become a Kathar if you commit a major sin. So in order to emphasize that they said no, deeds are important but Iman in the end is what's in your heart. Yes, it's expressed on the tongue, but your actions don't take you out of Iman. And there were other, the Muhaddithin, many of them added the actions to the definition or the description of Iman. Why? Because there were other deviant groups that they were dealing with, such as the Murjia, who were saying, once you believe, no matter what action you do, it doesn't matter. So once you're a believer, Actions cannot hurt you or harm you. It doesn't make a difference. Do what you want. You're a Muslim, that's it, do what you want. And so they were obviously refuting this through these ayahs where Allah says, believe and do righteous deeds, believe and do righteous deeds, so they included that. So in reality, there is no contradiction. That Iman is there. It is in the heart and the affirmation. It is expressed on the tongue and the actions are important and what they do is they bring one closer to be deserving of Allah's mercy. So even someone could say, well, you know, the Prophet said that no one enters Jannah through their deeds. So why are you saying, why are you making this big point to say that if you don't do actions, it's not good enough? Why? Because what makes us deserving of Jannah? This is what Imam Ghazali is going to get to next. And he mentions, Imam Ghazali says, And the proofs that works are important are more than can be enumerated, more than can be, they're countless. And even though, even if, even if a servant will enter into paradise or will finally reach paradise, by the grace of Allah and by his generosity by his fadl and his karam but it occurs after that servant has prepared themselves through Allah's obedience through obedience to Allah and through his worship he says because the mercy of Allah is extremely close to the mohsineen. Allah says, he's taking from an ayah of Quran, it's called iktibas. When you quote Quran or hadith and you bring it into your speech as a way of quoting it, but you don't explicitly say that, that's called iktibas in balagha, in rhetoric and eloquence. And so he's saying that if Allah says that the mercy of Allah is close to those people who are mohsineen, they do , they do excellence. then what it means is that if we want to attain that mercy, then we prepare ourselves to receive that divine guidance, to receive that divine love through good works and worship and obedience. But at the end, in the beginning and end, it only comes by Allah's generosity, not by our works, right? Not by our works. And so, and then he continues. And he says, so he's establishing that entering Jannah, it is at the end of the day by the Fadl of Allah. No one, no deeds can force Allah. And this was actually a debate in between the Mu'tazila and the Ahl al-Sunnah, Madhabs of Aqeedah had their positions on this as well, that can deeds force Allah basically to take you into Jannah? Are your actions something that make Jannah obligatory for you? Or is it by the grace of Allah alone, right? And the way of the Ahl Sunnah is according to one school that no, it's by Allah's grace alone. That yes, those actions draw you closer to Allah, they make you ready for the mercy of Allah, but it is by Allah's nothing controls Allah, not even your deeds control Allah. Because if not, then we would say that there's something other than Allah that's holding his hand and controlling him. And rationally, this is not possible. So we say no, our deeds do not control Allah . Allah is completely free. If he willed, if he willed, he could punish the most pious worshiper forever in hell. And if he wanted, he could give the worst of sinners and polytheists Jannah forever. However, what we say is, although rationally that's possible and nothing controls Allah, Allah is completely free, but we say that Allah himself has said that he will not do that. And so we believe that he won't do that because Allah says, not because of anything inherent or a rational proof against Allah's complete transcendence. So that's another thing to keep in mind, that this is a disagreement between the early Islamic sects and Ahl Sunnah. And then Imam Ghazali continues, right? And if it was said, and if it was said that the servant reaches Allah or his mercy, his Jannah as well with just Iman alone, just faith alone, that's all you need, we say to them, it's true, you're right. that Iman is enough to actually reach Allah. But when will he reach Jannah? Eventually he'll reach Jannah. If a person is a sinner, let's say they go and they spend time in the Hellfire now because of their sins, eventually, yes, you're right. Allah has said that everyone with Iman, with even a little bit of Iman will eventually reach Jannah. But after how long will they reach? and how many obstacles will be in the way facing him as he tries to get there and Aqaba is as we know from the Quran it's it's steep climb it's a high road but it's a steep climb up a mountain mountain a mountain side and so that's a hard way of going up it's the high road you know they say taking the high road it's it's a noble path but it's the harder way to get up and so how many obstacles you know, will face him until he gets to that which he desires. And the first obstacle that they have to cross is Aqabatul Iman, the obstacle of retaining your faith itself, the obstacle of faith itself. Is he going to be safe from losing his Iman or will he Or will he not be safe from it? What does that mean? If you think that you don't have to do any actions and you're giving this smart answer that look, Allah says you don't need to do any actions. Like, you know, we'll get into Jannah anyways, without actions. Imam Alhazal says, okay, but how long will it take you to get there to Jannah? You're gonna spend time in hellfire before you get to Jannah? No, right? Or here's the other thing. Even if it doesn't take time, what about the fact, the first obstacle is in your Iman itself, that Iman that you're saying, that you don't need to do any actions with, and you can just have that Iman and take you to Jannah, can you guarantee that you'll have that Iman for the rest of your life? And some say, of course, of course, I'm Muslim, how can you say that? And then Imam Ghazali is saying, but we know, we know that at the end of one's life sometimes, that Allah that at the end of one's life, the shaitan comes to that person and works very hard to try to dissuade them and mislead them on their deathbed. I mean, what would you, what would, can one guarantee if the shaitan comes in the form of one's father on their deathbed and says, you know, and tries to misguide them away from Iman? It's not something that people see, it's something that's happening in between the servant in their own Mind or head. Imam Ahmad Ibn Hanbal, the great scholar of hadith, the great champion of Ahlul Sunnah, when he was passing away, he was crying. And he was saying, not yet, not yet, not yet. And so they were saying, you know, why is this Imam crying at this time? He's done all these good actions, he's stood up for Ahlul Sunnah, and why is he crying, saying not yet? He's saying the Shaitan is coming to me and saying that's it, you know, you're saved, Imam, you're done, you're in Jannah, you're good. so that you relax. And he's saying not yet, not yet, meaning he hasn't passed away yet. He has not entered Jannah yet. So this is, Imam Ghazali is saying don't be deceived and think I don't need to do deeds because I have Iman. If you're doing that, then you're using the deen as a trick. You're using everything you learn and saying, as a scholar, you're saying well look, I have the hidden news which is you don't really need to do works. And so I'm gonna stop doing works behind the scenes and do everything bad I want 'cause I know I'm Muslim, I'm gonna get into Jannah. Then Imam Ghazali says, well what if you pass away outside of faith, subhanAllah? And then Imam Ghazali continues, whoops, I just. And then Imam Ghazali continues, sorry, I just lost my place here. Yeah. So he says, can you be safe that that will happen or not? Look, for example, at the story of Barsisa. You know the story of Barsisa? Have you heard of this? The story of Barsisa is found in some of the Tafsir literature, right? It's not, doesn't come, I don't believe it comes with a hadith attached to it to the Prophet . There are, it is ascribed back to some of the students of Ibn Abbas. the great companion and the master of Quranic tafsir from the Sahaba. And it talks about, it's a story, let's take a little tangent. It is a story where there was a monk in the times of Bani Israel. This is mentioned in Imam Qurtubi mentions this, Imam Tabari mentions this in their tafsirs and others also relate the story. Imam zabi in sir alam and nubala relates the story so there are enough people relating the story and it is about a monk from the times of Bani Israel and he spent 60 years worshiping Allah there are different narrations of it 60 years worshiping Allah some say 70 and never disobeyed Allah okay wasn't a prophet but he was on the path of the prophets and and he must have been a great Anhabid, worshiping Allah. In fact, he had a chamber, like a kind of a cell to worship Allah. And the Shayateen, obviously such a huge worshiper, such a huge, amazing servant of Allah, pious servant of Allah, very hard on the devil, on the Shayateen. And so they conspired on how to derail this person from the path of the deeds that they're on because this person was formidable in that and so they, There are different narrations, but in some narrations they possessed a beautiful young girl who had three brothers, others say four brothers. And those brothers brought that girl to this pious monk. because they had heard that if you want to cure her from this possession or this kind of state that she's in, go to this monk and ask him to read a dua and say, and like, you know, say, read some things over this, over your sister and she'll be cured. And so they took the sister to the monk and the monk, a very pious person, very, very, very careful about interactions, obviously with the opposite gender and everything, you know, he said that I will treat her, but just leave her here because she's going into these fits and whatever and he will treat her. There are different narrations and versions of this, how this story goes. Some say the brothers left the sister and went in the path of Allah for some time. Others that they just left her in his treatment. But the point was that he was left alone with that young girl and young lady. And for the first time he sees her and his heart is snatched away. He becomes enamored and completely head over heels, like some sort of like Hunchback of Notre Dame type of motif, I guess, and just falls head over heels with this Jariya. And all of a sudden this person who spent 60 to 70 years worshiping Allah and never disobeying is all of a sudden enchanted and charmed. And the Waswasa comes up in his head and he realizes this girl is vulnerable and The whisper comes in his head, look, just do what you want with her. You're never gonna get someone so beautiful in a chance like this ever. Just do it and you'll make Toba later. So that's the whispering that comes to him. So he does, he does it. And he commits fornication with her and she became pregnant according to the story she was expecting. And when he realized that the young girl was expecting, he realized that he would be outed in front of everybody, that his name would be ruined. and that he would be blamed for it. So then the waswasa came again and said, just kill her, do away with her and bury her and no one will know and just say she fell sick and no one will say anything and then make tawbah. You're a big worshiper, you never disobeyed, this is one deed you do wrong and do that. And so he did that because he was so ashamed of what people would say because he was the greatest worshiper of his time, of people knew. And so he did that. And so when he did that, he went back to his worship and everything pretending to everything was normal. But then the brothers, they say in this, according to this narration, they saw a dream. And in this dream, they are told that by these Shayateen, according to some of the Imams that, and Allah knows best according to us to the authenticity of the story, but it's worth just repeating because many Imams have said it, that this monk, this is what happened to your sister. And so all the brothers wake up and they say, I had a bad dream, I don't think I should talk about it. what, because the monk had said that your sister had passed away from the illness. And I buried her and it's all finished. And so the brothers were dismayed, but they didn't believe anything wrong. Now a long time has passed and this dream happens and they're like, I had a dream where this I'm that the monk is the one who killed the sister. Our sister. And so they all had that dream and they all went and confronted the monk and in that dream, they saw the exact spot where she was supposedly buried and they looked in that spot and they found her clothing had not disintegrated and they realized that it was true that this monk had done that deed and then committed murder and buried her. And so as they captured that monk, they took him to the authorities, to the king of the time and he was gonna face punishment for that crime. And as he was about to face his execution for his crime of murder, rape and murder, right, very serious crime, that devil comes to him and says, Look what you've gotten yourself into now, but I know the way out. And so he says, What? He said, All you have to do, this devil said, is make a sajda to me, a single one sajda to me, and then you can go back and make tawbah and do whatever you want. And so the monk says, I will do it to get out of it. And he makes that sajda and then that shaitan says to him that I am completely free of you, right? I fear Allah and I just invited you but I didn't make you do that. So then that shaitan leaves him realizing now he's brought him into shirk and he gets executed like that, he dies like that. And so this story is brought about to say as well that even in doing good deeds right one cannot become arrogant one cannot say I'm not saying that there's arrogance here but one cannot say that there's any guarantee even if you do a lot of good deeds and the safety of that so that's a kind of a side story that the commentators the commentator brings in so do you even know that your iman will be with you how can you say in this case the person did a lot of good deeds and they lost their iman right and if he does reach Jannah He goes and if he does enter Jannah without any deeds, he's going to be a bankrupt Jannati basically he's saying. So you enter Jannah finally, and you're bankrupt of any good deeds, you have nothing to show, you know, except that you got in. So what is the benefit of that? By virtue of the fact that Hassan al-Basri has said, that Allah says says on the day of judgment that um that uh Hassan al-Basri the great tabi says that Allah says on the day of judgment enter paradise through my mercy and divide it up amongst yourselves in proportion to your good works so this is not actually um we don't actually have a sonod for the exact uh it is a hadith But it's what you would call hadith makhtua. It cuts off at the tabiyah and you don't have the sahabi or back to the Prophet . However, as a piece of hikmah, a tabiyah as great as Hassan al-Basri, Imam Hassan al-Basri wouldn't have made it up themselves. But the point is that mercy is how we enter paradise. But imagine you had to divide up paradise now according to your works. Right? Would you want to go there with no works so you get a very small share? Would you want to do as many works as you can? And so this is what the point of that is. And then in the next section, Imam Ghazali continues, Ayyuh al-Walad. Oh dear son, or beloved son. As long as you do not do works, you will not find reward. And then he says, Hiqayah, he just says story. colon. He just writes that story. That there was a man from the children of Israel, who worshiped Allah for 70 years. This is not the same one as Barsisa, this is a different one. And Allah willed to manifest his affair and his rank in front of the angels. He wanted the angels to see how amazing this worshiper was. And so Allah sent an angel down to that worshiper who worshiped Allah for 70 years straight. He says to send an angel to inform that worshiper that even with all of this worship that you've done and the good deeds that you are not deserving of Jannah even after you've done all of these good deeds. and so when the angel went to the Abid the worshiper and said even though you're doing all of this you actually even then you don't you don't get paradise and he says he said to the angel we have been created for worship because Allah created us for worship and so what is befitting for us is to worship meaning even if you tell me that 70 years of my deeds were in vain Allah didn't create us. Allah didn't create us for reward. Allah created us for the Ibadah. And this is the answer of a true worshiper of Allah that are you worshiping Allah? I mean, yes, the rewards are there as like the carrot stick approach for those who need encouragement towards deeds. Yes, the rewards are there to encourage us. It's a big mercy from Allah. Many people would not do good deeds if they didn't have reward. but at the highest level he's saying I'm not worshiping Allah for these deeds so even if you said 70 years of worship counted for nothing I would do it just because Allah wants me to worship him and so this so this is the level of that right and so when Allah when the angel went back to Allah you know in however way that was you know, then qala ilahi anta alam bimaqal. Then he said, oh Allah, you know, my Lord, the angel said to Allah, oh Allah, you know best what your servant said. And then Allah, faqal Allah ta'ala, and so Allah says, , he did not turn away. He said, see, my servant did not turn away from our worship. And so we, out of our divine generosity, we will not turn away from him either bear witness oh my angels that I have forgiven him for whatever he has done you know so that that is that Imam Ghazali is bringing that to show that the real worshiper it's not doing deeds for the sake of the the reward it's worshiping Allah because he deserves to be worshiped so he's combining now you can see he's building the argument right people who say that Iman is enough and no works And then you have the idea of, okay, I'm going to do works, but I'm doing it just for that reward and not seeing Allah alone. And if you don't see Allah alone in your worship, right, then this is not the, this is not the highest form of Ibadat Allah Allah says, Allah says, And they have not been commanded except that they worship Allah sincerely. And this is the proof that the ulama used, that ayah is the proof that the ulama used, that your intention cannot have any other mix between Allah and something else. Your intention has to be purely for Allah in your works. What we notice as well is that as, you know, doing a lot of good deeds is a mashallah, an amazing thing, and doing it for the reward is also a very high level because you're believing in the promise of Allah. So it's an active Iman to do good deeds for worship, for reward. But when people are getting to the level of this high level of spirituality and learning, right, at some point in time, sometimes even doing business with Allah becomes something that is not desirable. It's not for that rank. For example, you have a child, and you tell them to do good actions, and you give them candy. So the child continues to do good actions, and you give them candy. But that's just to raise them to get used to good actions. At some point in time, the sweetness of the action would overcome the sweetness of the candy, and so that's how you mature. But what happens now is that when we start doing business with Allah, this is not the highest form of Ibradatullah . and there are some people as well isn't it kind of weird sometimes if you find this weird but I find it weird when someone does a good deed for you and every little good thing they do for you they keep saying I'm doing it for some ajr I'm doing it for reward and you're saying like are you doing it for you know they keep saying okay let me help you brother I want to get some reward I want to get some okay that's very good but do it for Allah don't tell a person you're helping them only to get the reward of Allah you can see you're doing for Allah but the point is as well that sometimes people of knowledge The one test that comes is that they become so caught up in doing rewards for themselves that what they feel is going to benefit them of their ritual worship, they don't want to help, they don't see helping other people as something to spend time on or doing other good deeds. So yes, Mashallah, read your Quran, do your dhikr, do all of those things. But don't forget to help someone who's in need is a very big thing. to volunteer somewhere, to do other things. Don't consider that beneath you. People of knowledge should not feel that only when I'm involved in something to do with like Quranic text or Hadith, that's the only good deed I do. Otherwise, I don't do those other deeds that common people do. This is another deception that happens. Waqala Rasulullahi Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam. Imam Ghazali continues. The Prophet said, the Prophet said, and that the Prophet said, although this is ascribed back to a goal of Umar ibn al-Khattab , take account of yourself before you are taken account of, and weigh your works before you are weighed, right? Take account of yourself before you are taking account. So every day, this muhasabah is very, very important. It's taking stock. That's what it means to take account of yourself. It means at the end of the day, what have I done of good and what have I done of bad? What could I have done better? Where did I go wrong? Every single day, we say so many words. Are all of those words in the pleasure of Allah ? Every single day, just our actions, just our expressions to other people. Did everything we do conform to what Allah wants us to do? And if not, what could we have done? So we should do that before the time comes when Allah will take us to account. Because once Allah takes us to account, at that point it's too late to repent. But if we make a program, a Muhasabah, every month, every week, every night before you go to bed, just ask yourself, what did I do? And in fact, as the mashaih say, the best person is the person who does their muhasabah minute by minute. The minute they do a sin, may Allah give us tawfiq, if this ever happens, that when they sin, they go and they make tawbah. Oh, . They said a word they didn't like, . Oh Allah, please forgive me. Right after that, or even after some time passes, they go and they make two rakat, they go make wudu, they make two rakats, they make saat tawbah. This is a person who's taking stock of themselves. They're constantly, it's like when you have a credit card and you buy something and you pay it off right away, buy it and pay it off right away, you'll never get a penalty 'cause you keep paying it, clearing it, clearing it, clearing it. And what happens when you, may Allah forgive us, when you let things pile up, you let your debts pile up. You may find out that you're in a situation where it hits you, but you're penalized without knowing it or without meaning it, may Allah forgive us all. And weigh your works before you are weighed. What's the quality of work that I'm doing? Is this like the way that I'm helping my wife at home, the way that I'm helping my kids, spending time with my kids or volunteering, the quality of work that I'm doing at work when I go to work and they pay me to do something. How much am I putting into that? So weigh your works before you are weighed. What kind of prayer are you giving to Allah? Are you praying a prayer that you're acting like if someone was talking to you and someone kept on looking at their phone, or kept on looking at their watch, what would you say? This person doesn't wanna talk to me. This person wants to do something else. I'm not important. And you keep on looking at your phone and you're like, yeah, mm-hmm, mm-hmm, yep. What do you think? So imagine someone who's standing in front of Allah and their mind is in the valleys of daydreams and they don't even care or they're praying so fast that it's as though they don't really care what they're doing, right? So this is where take weigh your works. Like what's the quality of my worship? Oh Allah, is this something that is deserving of even being accepted by you? So this is why, but do that before your works are weighed because once Allah weighs your works, you won't be able to change them. And then Imam Al Ghazali continues by quoting Imam Ali, he says, ... or in other manuscripts Mustaghnin or in others Mumtannin so he says Imam Ali is quoted as saying whoever thinks that without striving and putting effort meaning doing works that he will reach Jannah whoever thinks that without striving that you can reach Jannah then that person is wishful thinking, is merely thinking wishfully. It's like if you say, I don't have to go to work, I'm just gonna stay in my bed all day and a salary will come to me. You don't say that. You don't say, you know what, if I don't work and buy food, I'm just gonna get a good meal. I mean, unless you live with someone who's cooking for you or something, people don't act like that in the dunya. We don't say, if I don't work, I'm still gonna make money, for example. So why is it that we say, I'm gonna get to Jannah without doing the work for it? Imam Ali was saying, a person who does that is just wishful thinking. They're not actually thinking logically. And that person who thinks that by their expending their effort alone, they're gonna reach Jannah. And that person who does the opposite thinks that by my actions and my deeds, I'm gonna read Jannah, then that person is gonna get really tired. means he's gonna get exhausted. Meaning, how can you work for something in a finite realm with imperfect deeds, work for a place that is infinite and perfect. There's no way that you can work and earn Jannah. You'll keep working, keep working, but you won't make it. Or, a person who thinks that my deeds will take me into Jannah, that person is acting like they don't need Allah's mercy. They don't need Allah's mercy. And we know from the hadith that a man who did many, many acts of worship was given the choice. Would you like to enter Jannah on my mercy, Allah said, or on your own deeds? And he thought he did a lot of good deeds. He said, No, I'll enter Jannah on my good deeds, thinking he would get more than what Allah's mercy would give him. And the account that he had to give, it was extremely difficult. And he realized that Allah's mercy is far more vast than my deeds, but I still have to do those deeds. So he's saying you have to have both. And you don't go to Allah and say, boast Allah, oh look Allah, look what all the deeds I did. I'm such a good person, I'm such a big worshiper, I'll give you Jannah. So it's between this and between that. It's between this and between that, right? And then he, subhanAllah, there was once in the commentator says, another story is that there was a pious worshiper in Mecca. There was a pious man in Mecca and he went to a person who worshiped Allah. you know, for years. And so this person tells the worshiper, I have seen, meaning through spiritual vision, I have seen the preserved tablet on which the names of everyone who will enter Jannah and Jahannam are written. All information, all the things of this universe are written. And I saw your name in that vision of the preserved tablet, and you are one of the damned. He says this to this worshiper in Mecca. you are one of the people who are damned I've seen your name already on that tablet so the worshiper turned to him and said he says he goes I saw that vision of the tablet 40 years ago I've been seeing that vision but he goes but we were created for and so it's not my business except to worship Allah even if you told me that my name was on the list of people going for hell Allah asked me to pray to him so I'm just gonna keep praying to him I mean look at that because think about this imagine somebody said you know what we've looked at the lists and now the bill forbid you are gonna be the ones one of those enter Jahannam what would we say would we say why am I doing all this all these good deeds and if I have to end up there what's the point fine I'm not gonna do anything good would we say that would we say oh that's very bad But whatever it is, I'm gonna keep worshiping Allah because I love Allah. Even if Allah puts me there, I love Allah. That's why I'm gonna worship Allah. Not because, so even if you tell them, tell me, I'm gonna go to Jahannam, I will keep doing it. And if you tell that person, you know what, if Allah did not make Jannah as a reward, they would keep worshiping Allah, right? Why? Because they're saying, look, I'm not the boss. I just work here. I just work here. SubhanAllah once I asked my sheikh about I wanted to call some of my family members to Islam my grandmother namely in India and you know they hadn't heard about Islam they didn't know I was Muslim so I said like you know I said but if once you give the dawah of Islam to someone and you tell them about the truth then they're accountable and so I don't want to what if I don't think that they're gonna accept the truth is it better to not tell them so that they don't become accountable and so the answer I got was from my sheikh he said He says, look, we don't own the place. We just work here. If Allah says, bring the message to people, you do it. You don't think about what their end will be and what this will be, what that will be. We are servants and servants mean you do what you're told. And now it's Allah is the generous master. Leave it up to him how the end will be and have hope in him. Then, Kaal Al-Hasan Rahmatu'alay and Al-Hasan al-Basri said, Talabal Jannah bila amal zambun minadhurub Seeking Jannah without any good deeds, without any actions, is a sin from among the sins. So people who say, I don't need to do good actions, I love Allah and I know it, and I'm proud to be Muslim, that is a sin in itself, to say that you're not going to do good actions. Kaal Al-Hasan, okay, Al-Hakika, tarku mulahidati al-amal laa tarkal amal That spiritual realization is to stop noticing your good works, not to stop doing good works. And this is the difference. The pious worshipers, they stop seeing their works. So they're not paying attention to the, oh, I did one prayer, two prayer, three prayer, no. The whole point, the highest form of spiritualization is to not see any effect in your works. Your works are but a mercy and a gift from Allah. It's a blessing from Allah. So don't count that for yourself as though it's to your credit. Count that as a gift from Allah. So stop noticing your good works. In fact, a sign of acceptance of your good deed is that you forget about the good deed. So you did a good deed for someone else, but you keep turning it over in your mind, Oh, look, I'm so good, look, I did this, look, I did that. So you're basically celebrating yourself, there's like a little applause in the corner of your mind. saying I did this good work then the real spiritual effect of that good work we can say we don't know of its acceptance with Allah because we're just cheering on our egos but it's when you stop noticing because you're focused on Allah and your own faults all the good deeds that you did you're just putting it away it's going going going but it's being saved up for the Akhirab Allah knows but you're not putting in a bag to say look how much I have in my account you're just putting it away and one of the advices that I heard was that your public works, your public works for the sincerity with Allah , assume as though the works that you do in front of other people, they have no reward in it because of the possible contamination of our desires, but we still do it for the sake of Allah. So don't go to boast with Allah with your deeds. Then again, some people get a waswasa. And they say, oh, I don't know if I'm doing Riya, I don't know if this is Riya. And in reality, once you're worried about Riya, you're not a Munafiq. So you don't have to worry about that. So this is another thing that we shouldn't go to that, that's a trick of shaitan, to keep worrying, are we sincere? Are we sincere? I think there's Riya in my thing. Just because you think that you might be showing off doesn't mean you're showing off. And so right away, you should put that waswasa down and tell the shaitan to shut up and say, this is waswasa from shaitan. and never worry about is this Riyah or not. Once you worry about Riyah, it's not that Riyah is not your problem. It's waswasa, right? Riyah, the person who doesn't worry, doesn't think about it, and they're doing it to impress another person, right? So, and then Imam Ghazali continues, Aqala Rasulullahi Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam, Aqala Rasulullahi Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam, Aqala Rasulullahi Sallahu Alaihi Wasallam, the intelligent person the intelligent person is the one who takes themselves brings themselves down brings their nafs down and takes stock of it and works for that which is after death this is Hadith of the Prophet and he continues and the fool the imbecile is who makes their nafs follow all of their desires and then wishfully thinks and puts wishful vain hopes in Allah so what does that what does that mean that that intelligent person who's really intelligent will humble themselves and try to take stock of themselves and then start working for what is after death meaning the account Yamuqiyama and the imbecile is the person who keeps giving every single thing to their nafs all of the pleasures all of the desires and then says and then says I'm just gonna hope in Allah. I have faith in Allah. This is false hope. This is false faith in Allah. Oh, I'm just gonna worship. I'm gonna do whatever I want and worship Allah. And some people who ascribe themselves to spirituality, they claim this and they think this. I can do whatever I want wrong. And because I claim to love Allah, or I listen to spiritual music, or I have, you know, I do this, I'm in this group, or I have this Shaykh, I'm gonna be, I'm good, I don't need to do anything. This is one of the tricks of the Shaitan. This is one of the tricks of Shaitan. And the Sahib Awarif Al-Ma'arif says that nufus, the egos are predisposed to having bad adab with Allah, meaning to disobeying Allah, and the servant and the servant is commanded to have good adab with Allah, right? And so basically the nafs, it likes to go and wander around in the fields of disobedience. And so when you let go of, so this is why the job of the servant is to continuously keep on top of their nafs and rein it in and bring it, it's like a nafs is like a wild stallion. So the job of the master, meaning the person, the servant, is to keep reining in their nafs, because when you let the nafs go, it just starts wandering everywhere, and it grows and grows and becomes wilder and harder to tame. This is why it's better to start reining it in slowly and bring it in and keep a tight hold on it. But what do you do? As the Mashaikh say, that doesn't mean If you have a horse, a wild stallion, you don't just say it can't run at all, keep it in the stable. No, you ride that nafs, but give it the exercise. A horse, a stallion has to run, has to get its energy out, right? So you give your nafs what it wants from the halal, but you use diplomacy. You say, okay, nafs. You don't just try to break your nafs completely, because if you do that, the nafs will rebound. It will rebound and it will disobey you and throw you down harder than before. But what you say is, okay, Nafs, I'll give you a little bit of what you like from what Allah permits, but you have to give me what I want for Allah's sake. You have to give me. So you say, for example, okay, Nafs, I'm gonna wake up to pray in the night to Allah and I'll give you a little bit of a treat before you go to bed or whatever it is in exchange for this. Okay, I will try to control this aspect of my desires from the haram and you have to listen to me nafs, but I will give you an outlet in this other halal means. So diplomacy with the nafs is very important to get to the end. And then in the last section, a short paragraph, Imam al-Ghazali says, continues, , oh dear child or dear son. How many nights did you bring to life with the repetition of knowledge, meaning studying and revising and reviewing the books? How many nights did you spend up? So what this tells us as well, subhanAllah, the students of knowledge, may Allah forgive us for being not like they were in the past, they would stay up at night and review and revise. and they would read books and so how many nights have you spent all my students staying up and bringing the night to life? What was your nightlife? Reviewing books and reviewing knowledge. And you made sleep haram for you, you said I'm not gonna take sleep, I'm gonna stay up and study. And then Imam says, but I don't know, what was the motivating factor for you to do that? What was motivating you to stay up in those nights? People don't usually do that. Because if your intention was anything from the interests of this world, what are the interests of this world, right? What are the interests of this world? Anything that and gaining any of its, you know, paltry rewards or pleasures. is like rubble. It's like when wood is like, you know, if you see furniture that's been completely destroyed, it's just a bunch of wood and a big mess, rubble, what would you do with that? It's worth nothing. That's what the interests of this world are. He said, if that's what you were after, and to try to get its positions and ranks, right? You were trying to study ilm so that you become the scholar who people choose, who people invite, who people call. and to boast and to compete with your fellow scholars and your colleagues and your equals your peers meaning you memorize this so that you could come out looking like you memorize more I speak better Arabic than this person I know more hadith coming off my tongue I'm better than you know I give a better bayan or a better speech or a better khutba than the next Imam over there or I'm the visiting Imam I have to give up a better khutba than the one last week if that's your intention for why you stayed up at night then woe to you, and then woe to you again. Right? And then the commentators say, why did Imam Ghazali repeat it twice? For emphasis, woe to you, then woe to you again. But they gave this interesting interpretation that the first woe is the woe of this dunya. And the second woe is this sorrow, and the loss is the loss of the akhirah. Others, they say that the first one is a loss in the intention for even starting to study, and the second could also mean in your intention to revise, right? Intention to revise. And if your intention was to bring to life the Sharia of the Prophet , the sacred law and way of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, And to refine your character, to trim and prune your bad character traits to make them nice. and to break the ego which commands to ill deeds, to break that nafs, then glad tidings to you, blessed are you, then glad tidings are to you. Why glad tidings to you? Again the spiritual commentators say the first one is glad tidings in this world and the second one is glad tidings in the next world. Or they say, they say first is glad tidings for bringing the sacred law, the Shariat to life and the second glad tidings is the fact you also refined your character through doing that. Or they say, it's the first glad tidings is that you perfected yourself, and the second glad tidings is that you were able to pass on that knowledge and perfect other people. And they keep going. And the last one, they say the first glad tidings, maybe Imam Ghazali meant this, the first glad tidings is for Niyamul Jinan, the blessings of the garden. The glad tidings that you're going to get that. And the second glad tidings is Liqar Rahman, that you will meet the Most Merciful Allah . And it goes on and on. And so then he says, he says, . And for the person who gave this couplet and these lines of poetry spoke the truth. And we'll end this with this, . and he said Bismillah and I'm trying to try to translate this poetically the sleeplessness of eyes if not for your sake brings no gain the sleeplessness of eyes if not for your sake Allah brings no gain and once they haven't lost you then their crying is in vain meaning if you stay up at night for other than Allah's sake student of knowledge, you're not going to gain anything from all that sleeplessness that you lost. And once those eyes are not crying in tawba to Allah, but they're crying for some other reason, then that crying is meaningless. Meaning if it's not for Allah, but you're crying over something you lost in the dunya, in terms of like, oh, I could have had this gain or that gain, or even worse, your tears are to impress your audience or to make others feel like, mashaAllah, look at this dua, look what he recites, his heart is getting so soft, mashaAllah. You know when you see on YouTube these clips, and you see Sheikh so and so, emotional, exclamation mark. People like to see emotion, some people go on YouTube And we all like to hear that, the crying dua. They want to go to pray tarawiya in this masjid because people are crying. The imam cries when he recites. So we like that. But what happens is, what's the intention? When a person does that, are they genuinely moved? Or does it become a way of exciting the masses? And so for what are those tears coming down? If it's not because you lost Allah, meaning you became separated through sins and you're regretting it or that you're fearing it, but it was for any other reason, then it is badal, it is vain and false. And this is how Imam al-Ghazali finishes that section. Rasulallahu ala saida Muhammad , in the next section, he will speak about the summary of knowledge, inshallah, so we'll get to that next week.
