Bismillahir Rahman Raheem Alhamdulillahi Rabbin Alameen Alhamdulillahi Rabbin Alameen Alhamdulillahi Rabbin Alameen Salatu Salam Ala Saida Rasulullah Saida Rasulullah Ali Yusahbi Aljma'een Subhanakala ilmala illa ma alamtuna inaka aliman hakeem Alahma alimna maain fauna wan fauna bimaatu alimuna Wazidnumin fadhika illnuna taalima Inna kaalakulshin qadira salallahu alaykum wa rahadu wa rakatu Alhamdulillah. We are in the sixth lesson now of Ayuh al-Walad of Imam al-Ghazali, which is Imam al-Ghazali's dear beloved son or dear child or son. And if you remember last week, Imam al-Ghazali spoke about something very interesting. He brought up the concept of having an inner knowledge. a knowledge that is an outward knowledge that one can read and reason with and express to other people in words and in language. And then there's a type of knowledge he was explaining to his student, and therefore all of us, that there are some things that the student asked about that he cannot express in words because it's dhoki. Dhoki means it is experiential. And with that experiential knowledge, he said it would If you remember how he described it, he said to describe experiential knowledge is like describing carnal desire and fulfillment to someone who has never experienced that before. There would be no way to be able to write words about what that's like. You'd have to feel it to understand. And that all of these, and then Imam Ghazali is also hinting at the idea that All of those feelings and things that we feel even in the world of our senses, it's like an indication towards the things that are felt in the higher realm, in the realm of spirituality. And he's saying that there are some things that I simply cannot tell you. You're gonna have to get to a level, a point in your own spiritual practice and your seeking of Allah. where that will start to make sense to you and the answers will unfold to you and then he continues oh dear child he says some of the questions that you've asked about are of the type that are experiential. Like I can't write in an answer to you what you're trying to ask. It's the spiritual reality is not tangible. And as for some of the questions that you've asked, some of the other questions that you asked in the letter that you sent to me that can take an answer, that they are fit to be answered. Then we have answered those questions in Ikhya al-Mudin, which is Imam, the Imam is referring to his previous magisterial work, his magnum opus, Ikhya al-Mudin, already, and other works that I've written. And we will mention just a few bites or a few pieces of Of an answer to you because he had a muddin is you know sometimes four volumes sometimes six sometimes eight volumes I mean depending how it's printed, but it's in four parts and just tell someone okay the answers there go look for it I mean, it's you know, it's not exactly so he's saying like look the answer is there in my longer books, but let me just give you a a tidbit to benefit from. And they say, So the first, as for the first of the questions that you asked me, it was about the spiritual traveler. What is incumbent upon that person? What is necessary for that person? And this is how we will respond. Four things are essential for a spiritual traveler or a seeker and he says number one says first thing is correct beliefs sound beliefs without any innovation okay we'll stop and we'll explain each one so actually know what we'll do we'll go through all of them and then we're going to come back to explain it right and then he says sincere repentance without going back and returning back to the old sins. So you repented from something and you don't go back to it. That's the second essential for a spiritual traveler. he says making all opponents people you have something some some beef with satisfied till no one has a right to claim anything from you from from oneself ............ attaining knowledge of the sacred law the Sharia to the extent that one can carry out the commands of Allah and And then he says, yeah, and then we'll get to that later. So let's go back because this is very important. I mean, he mentions it in four lines and doesn't elaborate, but it's because his student is a senior scholar of his time, right? Any student of Ima al-Ghazali would know these things, but for us, it's very important to understand because many times we want to experience the spiritual either because we hear about the delights and the savor of our connection to Allah , we understand the idea of the heart being at peace and at rest and we want to seek that, especially in our world today. We want to have that inner peace, that sense of mindfulness. We understand as well the higher quality and the higher character traits that spirituality calls us towards. So we want to achieve a lofty character traits but he's saying in order to get there there are four things you have to know even before that and these are the basics of our of our Deen number one is correct beliefs without any innovation and it's this is the Aqidah as they say as he says or as the commentator says to sum it up that's the Aqidah of Ahl Sunnah that is the Aqidah of the people of the prophetic Sunnah and the majority of the Muslims the Sunni Muslim creed And what that means is to know not the finer details of theological debates and disputes. No, it's just to have sound beliefs yourself. It's to enter your spiritual travel without any funny beliefs from other walks of life, from other foreign ideas, and without any bida. What is bida? Bida is defined basically as anything that is introduced into the religion which goes against the Quran and the Sunnah and does not have any basis whatsoever supporting it from within the tradition, right? So what that definition is very important because these days the idea of innovation, it's incorrectly contested because people think that anything new within the Islamic community is wrong and bad regardless of whether it falls in line with Islamic values or whether it doesn't, right? So that is not the case. Like for example, we're using, you know, maybe a number of years ago, the idea of broadcasting a lesson through video to people, you know, across the world to be speaking into a microphone. to be using, to be reading the commentary on an iPad, you know, in which I've highlighted using a, you know, a special, what do you call those pens? You know, all those things are bit out. It's an innovation, but it's a technological innovation that aids the spread of knowledge that falls in line, doesn't conflict with anything Islamic. Then there are other things, for example, like spiritual, things to repeat formulas litanies to read that were written in the in the times after the prophet and those all consist for example of different Quranic ayahs different dhikrs different prayers to Allah and these are fine for example why because they come in line with Islamic ideas and teachings and do not conflict with anything in the Quran the Sunnah so that those are examples of innovations that have helped the deen Some of these innovations are actually wajib. Some of these innovations are sunnah. And then there is, however, what Imam al Ghazali is talking about is a bida sayyyah, a bad innovation, which means an innovation in one's beliefs, for example, believing, of course, believing in anyone after the Prophet having attained a level of any prophethood or anything like that that would take one completely out of Islam for example another example of an innovation is believing that Allah has human like has created creation like qualities or characteristics right this is an example of an innovation and another example of an innovation is saying for example that something that is completely antithetical to Islam is now permissible in Islam only because the times have changed and we should all get over the idea that pork is haram, the pig is a very clean animal now, they wash it many times in the farm, so therefore pork should be halal, that's an example of an innovation, anyone who says that, oh medically speaking or something like that, that's an example of bringing in an innovation, so the problem with bringing in innovations into our beliefs is that the other, the previous religious traditions that were messages from Allah that were originally traditions that started with divine revelation, the reason why they went astray is because they allowed these innovations to come in slowly into their practices or into their belief. And what that did was is over time, people change a little bit and when they feel that they can change a little bit and they can accept a little bit of change, it opens the floodgates to people changing many things about it. And then eventually their scriptures were changed and they just became religions completely different than what Islam is. Otherwise there would be no difference in the previous religious traditions and Islam today. There would be no difference in between them. But there is. That's because of innovation. This is why Imam Ghazali is saying, get that out. And he's also living in a time where there are many sects, many sects within Muslims. and different types of philosophers and the Shia and all these different types of groups and many of them are splintered as well. So he's trying to emphasize that make sure you've got your correct beliefs, don't hang on to anything that you are attached to from different types of innovations, let that go. And of course the best way to understand if your beliefs are sound is first of all to stick with the majority of Muslims, the majority of Muslims have sound belief. Anyone who tells us otherwise and who suspects that all the Muslims are off because they don't believe what I believe, this person is someone to watch out for. Whenever you're taking a teacher or whenever you're listening to a lecture or anything like that, anyone who tries to make it look like the vast majority of Muslims are gone, lost, and only that sheikh and his band of merry men are on the path of haq, that's something to watch out for or take a basic course. The Aqidat Tahawiyah course, the Kharidah course, for example, Absolute Essentials here at Seekers, we have courses for that. The other thing that Imam Al-Ghazali mentions is interesting because he says, Tawbatanasuh, right? A very sincere repentance. As you know, Naseeha comes from the word, you know, to mean well, to give sincere advice. So Tawbatanasuh is when you, you're not just making, you're not just repenting saying, oh Allah, that was bad. And then you go back to what you were doing. That's not Tauba. Remember we said earlier, Tauba is like to turn, it's to turn back. You're going somewhere, you turn and you come back. And Allah uses the word Tauba, not like Tauba, not only for us turning back on sins and going back to him, but on him turning back towards us and relenting with mercy. So it's this idea of you've left it. And those are the those are old days now, you know, the sins that we used to do when we were young and stupid, for example, caught up in our desires when we didn't know better. Those are not things that we should go back to. If we slip, we make a toba again. And so that sincere repentance means that you mean it. Not like, you know, a person who is addicted to something or they have a bad habit. or they can't help a certain personality trait, and they know that they're gonna commit this sin again. So they kind of, they make istighfarataAllah, which is the best thing to do, it's good, but they're not ready to let it go just yet, because they're gonna have to dig into their personality a little bit to do that. So that digging in, and that's what they say is so important because it's the idea of tahliya before tahliya. So the spiritual masters, they say, do you have to flush all of that out first? And then you start doing the adornment of your character and your soul. Like when you move into a house and it's old and decrepit, but you move into a place and you wanna move in and make it comfortable. You don't just start putting down your furniture and putting down the carpet. No, first thing you do is you take a broom, you sweep the place, you mop the place, you go into the bathroom, you clean it, you clean something out. Then when it's clean, then you move your stuff in, then you start decorating the place, right? Otherwise, it's like putting newspaper on vomit, right? It's not gonna take it away. It's just superficial. So anything that we do, spiritually speaking, Imam Ghazali is implying, without having taken out the nasty quality character traits that are holding us back from Allah, then anything, it's like building on the ocean. You can build as much as you want on the oceans, no foundation, it's just gonna sink. So, and the other thing is that anytime we try to, because the nuffs, what it wants to do is it wants to get advantages, but it doesn't want to do the work to take out the disadvantages. And so eventually, if we keep thinking that I'm going to be spiritually some amazing person, but I'm still hurting other people, you know, I still owe people money and I could pay back. I'm still like horrible in my character to my wife and children or whatever it is. or you have these hidden departments in your life, as my Shaykh calls it, hidden departments. Eventually, if you try to pursue spirituality without checking those skeletons in the closet, those problems will resurface again and you'll have to face them at one point. So start with a repentance and it could just mean, oh Allah, for whatever I've done, I repent to you, I turn back to you and these qualities that I have inside me, I don't want them. and these bad habits that I'm up to in these things that I've done take them away from me so I can come closer to you and make me so far from them that they become something from my past something that you've forgiven and I never see again and if I ever do slip oh Allah please pick me back up again and take me to you and never let me lose hope and it's there's no I mean Tauba is not like a light switch right it's not like a light switch and unfortunately the Shaitan wants us to think like that that I made Tobah and then tomorrow I made the same sin again. That means that the Tobah isn't complete, but it doesn't mean that the Tobah is over. It means that you're dead, that is the process. So it's not about turning a light switch off and saying, I have no more sin, I'm done. It's about that process of cleaning and cleaning and cleaning until like a mirror that's rusted. that's rusted or like covered with dust. You couldn't even tell it's a mirror, but you're just polishing, polishing, polishing until one day all of a sudden you see a reflection in it until one day it becomes clean. That's the whole point. But in this case, it's the heart and you're trying to clean it, remove that rust and that dust from it, the mud until one day it reflects light. And what is that light? That's the divine light of the things that we are doing, the dhikr of Allah , the worship of Allah. That takes time and it's not gonna be overnight. But when you slip and you fall, the etiquette is to pick yourself back up and keep going. That's what Allah loves to see. Not someone who's perfect and says, oh, Allah, I'm so perfect. I switched my sins off and I'm fine now. No, it's a process. And then, so that's the sincere repentance. And also what does it entail? It entails, first of all, regret for what you've done, right? So you can't look back and say, yeah, that was a crazy night. Oh, I'm not gonna do it again, don't worry. No, you can't do that. You say, oh Allah, what I did that night, I'm sorry for that and I'm disgusted by myself. So please take me back and never let me do it again. So there's that intention and firm resolve. I'm not gonna do this again. And the third thing, so regret, intention and resolve to leave it. Then there's the idea of getting away from the environment that made you fall into those problems and sins. So if you're hanging out with the wrong group of friends and that's what brought you back into that sin, then you have to look for a new group of friends, right? You have to be willing to part ways with the things that bring you back. 'Cause if you're attached more, this is a whole thing that it's about, right? Are you attached more to Allah or are you attached more to the things that you like, your fancies and your desires and the people that you wanna be with and the places. And if it's the internet that makes you sin, then make a plan to put yourself at a distance from the times and the situations and the websites that make us sin, right? It's very important to set up these barriers, especially in our world today when it's not like you have to go looking for haram, in the olden days in order to do the haram, People would have to like go to like a certain section of town. The red light district was like always off somewhere in a place where no respectable person wanted to go. The taverns and all those things were in those areas. And so you would have to go looking for haram. In our day and age, the haram comes right to you on your screen when you don't even intend for it. And so we have to set up these barriers and keep trying when that evil jumps over the wall We have to keep putting it back out. That's how we keep up that repentance. The fourth thing is to repay anyone who we have wronged and he'll get to that in a second as well. So sincere repentance is you have to make up for the bad that you did if it means owning back someone's rights. So you stole something from someone, you have to give it back to them. If you can't give that item back, you give the value back. If you can't find that person anymore, you get that wealth out of your possession and you give it to some sort of charity, like some sort of general trust of charity. Not even like as zakat, not even as sadaqah because you're not rewarded for that. That's stolen money or that's something you cheated someone for. So you don't even act like that. You're doing a good deed. You don't expect reward from that. That's if you can't find the person. If you know that person and you know I stole something when I was a kid from this person. then you can leave money. You don't have to tell them what it is, but you just leave money for them or you mail it to them or something like that. So there are details about that, but the point is that you try to make up for what you did. And the third thing is making all opponents satisfied. A khusum is not just an opponent, it's anyone who has something against you, someone you have a beef with until no one has a right to claim from one. What does that mean? You think back to your life and you think, Okay, I've paid back everybody. Okay, I didn't steal anything from anyone. Okay, you know what? Okay, there was a time that cousin of mine, I really hurt her feelings when I said something. You know, these things happen like, you know, sometime randomly you're in some sort of difficult conversation with a family member or an extended family member and all of a sudden you hear, Oh yeah, well, 10 years ago, you did this, this is, don't think I ever forgot that. It's like, oh yeah, well remember what you did to me on the night of November 27th, 1995, whatever, people have memories when they're hurt, they have a memory of it, it's etched into you. It's not like a scar, scars, you can forget about them, but it's in your soul. So you have to make sure if there's someone that you've hurt, that a spiritual person is not someone that people go around saying, spiritual, this guy did this to me, this girl did that to me and she back bit me this way, you know how she spoke to me at that time? You know, so any anyone that you have a beef with or that some someone has a beef with you, you go to them and you make them satisfied with you either through giving them repaying them. If you can't, then you make them happy in some other way. If you can't ask them to forgive you. Right. And when they forgiven you, then and as you can see, right, these are hard things to do to open up conversations with people that, you know, it could but you don't have to re Something that's been buried for a long time and bringing it up will be more painful or more harmful. You don't have to go and rehash everything 'cause sometimes that brings up more pain or damage. Sometimes it's just easier to say, look, if I ever did anything to you, please forgive me. Or just being nice to that person, making dua for that person, things like that until it's resolved. The other thing is attaining knowledge of the sacred law, the fourth thing. And it's interesting, he brings fiqh and knowledge last out of the four. attaining knowledge of the sacred law to the extent that one can carry out the commands of Allah. Why? He's speaking to a scholarly person. So he knows the first thing that they're going to be doing is studying sacred law. And so he's putting that after making sure you don't have any strange ideas in your beliefs. Make that tawbah, make all of your opponents satisfied. It's really easy to study a lot of books. It really is. What's hard is to go back to your parent or your sibling and to say, sorry, that's hard. You know, that's hard to go to your spouse and say, yeah, you know that time I shouldn't done that, you know, or to your child, you know, even so attaining sacred knowledge of the sacred law to the extent that one can carry out the commands of Allah, which means that anything more than this for the spiritual traveler is not necessary. It could be after you're Farda'in, you're ready to go for seeking more. However, at the same time, there are some people who do have to seek more knowledge. Those are the students of knowledge. Those are the people who aspire to become scholars, to preserve knowledge. And everyone has a different, it's a spectrum. So everyone gets to a different point in that journey, but it's a noble journey. But what he's trying to say is that don't think that only after studying for 10 or 20 years, that only after that can you start to spiritually travel to Allah . And then he says, so that was just to outline those four things, because it's not very simple if you think about it. But Imam Ghazali mentions it in a way that's very obvious to people at that time. And so any more than that is not wajib upon you. Then after all those four essentials, then attaining from the knowledge, knowledges of the hereafter what one needs to attain salvation. Because now you have set the foundation, you cleaned up everything, you're ready, and then you attain the knowledges. Notice he said the knowledge singular of sacred law, and then he said the knowledges of the akhira. of the hereafter because of the vastness of how the vastness of the knowledge of the hereafter. Why? Because even though knowledge is so vast in this world, how many libraries can be filled with books and how many people spent their entire lives countless generations of people studying and writing and and commenting and debating and proving and yet the knowledge is of the hereafter the heart is a realm that is even more vast and wider than the books and then and those things so but what do you need to know from that what you need to attain salvation and this is what he's talking about in this not even making the knowledge of the hereafter into a a fan, like an art or like a hobby, but taking from it what you need. So the point is not that you have a library, look at my Sufi library. You know, I've got every book translated into English language on the topic of spirituality in Islam, and this is gonna somehow make me closer to Allah. No, there are people who have never touched a book of spirituality before. There are people who cannot read or write, and yet they got from they got what they need to go to Allah right they got what they need to go to Allah so the next thing then he can Imam Ghazali continues and says it is said narrated that Shibli who was a very very early spiritual master he was around fourth century of Islam he had 400 teachers 400 teachers he says I read 4,000 hadiths then I chose one hadith out of 4,000 to act on And I left what was other than it. And what the commentator says, it doesn't mean I ignored it. It means I did not memorize that. I did not make that the centerpiece of my practice. Rather, out of all those 4,000, I picked one. Right? And he says, I picked one. And then he says, ... ... ... Why? Because I pondered. And I found that my being saved, my salvation, and my being rescued from my state, the answer could be found in that one hadith. And the knowledge of the earliest ones, meaning all the previous prophets, all the later ulama and spiritual masters, was summed up inside one thing. inside one thing it was it was buried inside that one thing and so I suffice with that one thing right and that is that the messenger of Allah may peace and blessings be upon him is reported to have said to some of his companions and I'll just read the hadith as read the narration as he said it Work for this world relative to how long you will stay in it. And work for the hereafter relative to how long you will stay in it. And work for Allah according to how much you need Him. How much do we need Allah? And work for the Hellfire according to how much you are able to withstand it. So, just a comment before we move on. This story, this narration is mentioned in a tafsir called Ruh al Bayan. However, they did not, the commentator did not find, and the verifiers did not find a chain for this narration. They suggested two other narrations in Bay Haqi and in It was the other work in Behaqi and I forget the other work, but they did not find an authentic chain of narration to connect this to. So many times, as we said, sometimes what they'll say Hadith is. perhaps meaning perhaps they had a chain for at that time when they when this is written which is a thousand years ago or perhaps there was a chain that they found that we haven't found or perhaps it was maybe referring to the fact that it's a it's a generalization from different prophetic teachings or different hadiths combined into one and so let's go back to this right work for this world work for this world relative to how long you will stay in it So it doesn't mean he didn't say if you're gonna stay in the world for you know, how many how long do people live, you know some decades? 50 60 70 80 or 90 what they're not saying work according to that he's saying relative To how long relative to what? relative to the hereafter So if you put up to a hundred years, let's say inshallah we live to a hundred years in with the pleasure in the pleasure of Allah inshallah You know in the best of health and states, inshallah. Compare a hundred years to the hereafter. How long is the hereafter? 10,000 years, a million years, a billion years. It's infinite, infinity. So what does even a million years in infinity feel like? It's like a drop in the ocean. So what does our hundred years feel like? So he's saying that we have such a, you know, as I say in math, as my teacher said, is like one over infinity. What does that equal? You know, for math, one over infinity equals approaching zero. It's like such a small amount that's almost like approaching zero. And so this world is like nothing compared to the hereafter. So if you know that relative to the hereafter, this is how the world is. Work in the world for that extent. Meaning the extent that you need to survive. It doesn't mean you don't work or you don't eat or you don't take a shower. You don't go have a bite to eat or go grab a coffee. No, it's not saying that. It's saying that you do in it what you need in order to take you to the next life. And everyone has a different amount that they need to get out of that. That's for sure. The ulama and the spiritual masters, they were able to put their entire full-time focus on rigorous acts of worship. Most of us, if we do that for even a single day, will be very tired, right? So what do we use? We use diplomacy with the nafs. We give the nafs something and we take something back from it to worship for Allah. to worship Allah so you work for this world relative to how long you will stay in it and you work for the hereafter relative to how long you stay in it meaning the majority for the spiritual traveler he's saying the majority of your efforts should be on the other world rather not like generally speaking a person who's moderately religious the way that the ratio is divided is that you know most of the time you work for your world your dunya and you give some time for the hereafter so you know you work all week and once a week you might you know go to the mosque and pray to Allah and maybe do a little bit of dhikr or something like that so it's like a portion but Imam Alhazali is saying no flip that if you're gonna spend most of your time in the hereafter and very little time in the world make most of your time geared towards thinking about the hereafter and again how do you do that through your intention so for us for people like us and what do we do we have to spend time in traffic you know that's not a time I'm praying no I have to go to work I have to entertain my family I have to keep up with my friends what do I do I make that for Allah I make my intention when I'm doing that to please Allah so right away if it's something wrong I'm doing then you can't do it for Allah so this is why they say make all of your intentions for Allah And those things which you absolutely cannot find an intention for Allah, get rid of it. Because it's something like, it's like saying I have all these sources of income, but there's one source of income, I can't find a legal justification for it. That's illegal, so you let go of that, right? So in the same way, anything that you can't make an intention for Allah, then you should leave that, right? And many of the halal things you can find intention for, whether it's eating something nice or recreating a little bit. Then he said, now work for Allah according to how much you need him, subhanAllah. Now this is obviously a very tall order of business because how much do we need Allah? More than anything else, more than anything else. And if we actually worked according to how much we need Allah, subhanAllah. So what do we do? We try and then we ask Allah to forgive us for what we cannot do. Right? We try to live in this world as though we're travelers, remembering that we're just passing through, right? And so it's like a person who like to give you an example, right? Let's say a couple gets married and they're gonna spend a night in a hotel for a honeymoon and then they have to move into an apartment or a house. How long will they spend decorating that hotel room compared to how long they would spend working on the house it just makes more sense if you're just passing through a hotel room for one night right you're not gonna start like dusting the corners and you know making everything perfect because you know you have to leave you have to check out so the Dunya is the same way we know we're gonna check out at some point so why behave like there's nothing else to do but fix your Dunya you do what you do what you have to do in the Dunya and then you work for the Akhirah and yeah and then then you work for Allah according to how much you need him and then yeah and then he and then he says something interesting and work for the Hellfire work for it do things that will take you there according to how much you're able to withstand it so that's the thing to put in front of us all the time this last point is obviously not sarcastic but it's a it's kind of um it's in a way of like challenging one, right? If you're gonna work for Hellfire, I mean, how do you work for Hellfire? Do the deeds that take you there, sins and evil things, hurting people, hurting, you know, offending Allah, offending creation, doing wrong, cheating people, lying back by all those things that they talk about, then think about how much you can withstand the Hellfire, right? And if you can withstand the Hellfire, then by all means, go ahead, do those sins, but if you can't, right, like if you were just to turn on your stove, And I said, just put your finger on the stove and let's see how long you put it on. You would say, I'm not gonna do that. Why would I do that? If I have a match here, say, okay, you can pass your finger quickly through it. Now just put your finger and just rest it inside the burning match. I wouldn't do that for a second. And yet the fire of this world compared to the hellfire is that if a person felt the hellfire for a single moment, they would be able to sleep in the fire of this world if it was all around them. Right? So that's what they say, you know, and subhanAllah. So if that's what the hellfire is like, so if you cannot stand it for a single second, then why even commit works that will take you there? And just ask it, and this is actually the last thing is just like, if we can't do the third thing that he said, which is working for Allah how much you need him, then at least let's avoid wrong. according to how much we can withstand Hellfire. Subhanallah, I believe it was Muhammad Ali, the famous boxer, Rahmat Ali, MashaAllah, you know, great Dahid Islam. He used to keep a matchbox in his pocket. And every time he was tempted to do wrong, he would strike it and just put it on his finger. And it was in an interview and he said that it's because it reminds him of the Hellfire and he would stop from doing that. This is before all these things. This is when he was speaking to non-Muslims, you know, Allah, but Allah really inspired him. But that's what we have to do. And then Imam Ghazali continues, and he says... Sorry, lost my place for a second. And then he gets into another section, Ayuhulwalad, dear child, either alimta bihadul hadith Oh my dear child, if you work according to this one hadith, then there is absolutely no need for you to gather a large amount of knowledge. This is the secret he's telling you after he spent all these years seeking knowledge. So think about another story and it is this, think a ponder about this. that Hatim al-Assam the great spiritual master was among the companions of Shaqiq al-Balkhi who was also a spiritual master but that was his that was his Sheikh they lived in in the 300 years after Hijra now Hatim al-Assam very interesting um story why he's called Hatim the Deaf you know why he's called Hatim the Deaf you know HashaAllah Hatim the Deaf You guys know why he's called Hatim the Deaf? Hatim Asam? Because it is said that he had such chivalry, you know, spirituality isn't just about saying stuff and doing stuff and feeling. A lady came to him to ask him a question, 'cause he was a man of knowledge, a man of learning. And she said, as she was asking the question to him, she let out some gas. Some gas escaped, made a sound. And just imagine, I mean, you're speaking to someone respectable and all of a sudden you let out a sound like that. And he knew that she would be embarrassed by that. You fart in public, it's like you feel a little embarrassed, right? And what did he do? He pretended that he was deaf. He said like, and he pretended he couldn't hear her question. So when she tried to say the question again, he was pretending like, I can't hear you, say it again. And so her embarrassment went down. And she felt, okay, thank you. He didn't hear me, right? So just to let her off from that difficult feeling of being embarrassed in front of him, he pretended that he was deaf. And every time, it was written for 10 to 15 years after, whenever he used to see this woman, he would always keep up this thing like he's hard of hearing so that she would not feel embarrassed in front of him about what happened. SubhanAllah, look at the chivalry, how they, forget watching out for the feelings of people. You're even worried about people feeling inconvenienced around you, embarrassed around you. You know, amazing. Look at where these people are. So it wasn't just the fact that they prayed all day, fasted all day, stood up all night, made lots of dhikr. You know, they were very, very tough on themselves. They loved creation. They loved Allah's creation because of their love for Allah. Because of their love for Allah. And that made them behave towards Allah's creation in ways that we can't even imagine how tender that is. towards someone else right just to the feelings of a woman you don't even know subhanAllah I mean or a person you don't even know what I'm saying is they had no connection personal necessary connection they're not husband or wife or anything but MashaAllah this is how they treat strangers this is how we treat strangers ask ourselves let alone people we know so and then he says so the story goes sorry I got away from the story so he was his Sheikh Shaikh Khalbakhi Rahimahmullah ta'ala his Sheikh asked one day You have kept my company for 30 years. I've been your spiritual guide and you've been taking from me. What did you gain after all these 30 years, right? I picked up eight pieces of wisdom. from knowledge, from of knowledge, eight pieces of wisdom or benefit from you. And that is enough for me, out of 30 years I've spent with you just eight things I picked up and that's enough for me and my spiritual salvation in all of this affair. What are those eight things that you picked up for me? He says the first one, the first wisdom He says, Any nazar to il al-Khalq, for aytuli quli wahid minhum Mahboob al-Ma'ashuqan. . . . . . . . Fatafakkartu Wa Kultu Afdul Mahbub al-Mar'i Maa Yad Khuru Maha Hoof in Qabarihi Wa Yu Nisu Hoofihi Wa Yu Nisu Hu Faa Mahbubatan Li Li Takuna Li Takuna Li Si Rajan Fien Qabari Watu Nisu Ni Fihi Wulatatat Ruka Ni Fareedan So he says and I'll paraphrase the best type of so he says whoa wait what did I say yeah wait Sorry, just to step back, I'll give you the context, then I'll give the quote. I looked at creation, people, and I saw that every single person has someone that they love or something that they love, something that they're infatuated with and absolutely passionate about, something that loves them back and they love them. And some of those things or those people, some of those people they love will accompany them to their final illness and some of those things will accompany them to the edge of their graves. However, all those things will return back. All those things, once that person is buried in their grave, all of their beloveds will turn back after the funeral, after everything their friends, family will leave you then. And however, it will leave him, that person in the grave, alone and solitary and nothing will enter his grave with him. So I thought about this and I said, the best beloved that a person could have should be that which enters the grave with him and makes him feel comfortable and takes away his his alienation and I did not find that that could be in anything except good deeds in good deeds and so I took that those as my beloved's and as a light for me in my grave and so they could keep me comfortable and would not leave me alone and so his teacher approved of that right sorry I should So the best type of beloved, right, is the one that will enter his grave with him, Alhamdulillah, and find a comfort there, Alhamdulillah, and found that none other than righteous deeds could do that, right, Alhamdulillah. So I took them as my beloved, my light and my comfort in my grave that would never leave me. Let's continue. So Al-Fadr Thania. And then he said, the second thing is, Inni raitul khal ka yakhataduna ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa ahwa aa nafsi And he says that. And then I looked at people and I saw that everyone was following their vain desires. Hawa is like, Hawa is not just desires, it's like your folly, a stubborn folly. It's like this idea that you're obsessed with or something that you're just hooked on and it's of no benefit to you, but it's just an idea that you have. Like, hey, why don't you... It's an idea that comes inside your heart and you can't argue with the person that it's wrong because they just don't wanna accept it. They don't wanna hear it. That's called hawa, right? So many people, their beliefs, their false beliefs, once it comes into their heart, even when you try to reason with them or prove to them that it's not correct or their habits, their fetishes, their desires, you try to tell them it's not good for you, they still say, oh, who cares, I like it. So that's their hawa. So he's saying that people follow all kinds of desires and they're so quick to follow up with whatever their lower selves, their egos tell them. And so I thought about the saying of Allah, Allah says, and whoever fears the station of his Lord and forbids his nafs from its misguided fancies, then paradise will be the resting place, will be the resting place. So he says, I thought about that ayah. So I set out against my nafs. So I set out against, and then he says, and I knew that the Quran was true. And so I set out against my nafs and struggled against it by not letting it enjoy its misguided fancies until it became satisfied with the obedience of Allah. and followed my directives, right? So this is very important. The wisdom he's saying is that everyone has things that they're hooked on and you have to work on asking yourself, what is it, for example, like a stupid hobby that you have that's a complete waste of money or bad for your health or just not good for you and yet you still keep it up. What are all those things? And we all have these little idiosyncrasies about us. It could be spending too much time scrolling, it could be a bad habit, maybe a smoking habit or something like that, something you're addicted to, whatever it is, what is that? Or it's an idea, it's an idea that's not Islamic, but it's taken root inside your heart because you have some soft spots for it, but with Allah it doesn't mean anything, so this is what he said, he said, I set out now to rid my nafs of that. And in the beginning, the nafs does not like that. It's not easy to do that, to take it away, but you start slowly and you work to take it out. He says, until my nafs became satisfied with the obedience of Allah, because the nafs, every time you try to pull it to the obedience of Allah, it tries to go back to its familiar place, which is desires. And the mind likes to, rather than focusing on Allah, it likes to daydream, it likes to wander. right likes to chatter doesn't want to be silent and focus on Allah so it takes diplomacy but eventually after getting to it diplomacy diplomacy or hammering it because Imam Ghazali's method was kind of more hammering it um eventually it gives up either way you take it if you stick with it and ask Allah's tawfiq and Allah guides us then eventually the nafs submits and then begins to follow your directives what do you want to want it to do you want it to do this much worship it'll do it want to stay away from these sins it'll do it so someone who's had a lot of practice and time uh training their nafs eventually eventually it becomes much easier for that person to do greater and greater acts of worship and to stay in the obedience of Allah for a longer and longer time it doesn't mean that the the nafs will never rear its ugly head it never really goes away this is important unlike prophets prophets are perfect we can be protected but we can never be sinless. And so the nafs will always try to rear its ugly head. You maybe didn't commit a sin for 10 years and someone got on your nerves and you did that sin or something like that, or you got tempted. But the point is that you keep going back and taming it again and again and asking Allah for tawfiq 'cause only by Allah's leave could that be done. So this is the second wisdom. The third wisdom he said is, fi jama ai haltaam id dunya thumma yumsikuhu kaabidan yadahu fa tamaltu fi qawlihi ta'ala ma ainda kum yaan fad wa ma ainda Allahi ba'aka fa bazaltu mahsuli fi minad dunya liwaj hillahi ta'ala wa fa fa'raqtu baynal masakeen wa fa'raqtu hu baynal masakeen lia kuna zukhran li ainda Allahi ta'ala and he says that I looked, I saw people gathering the paltry things of this world. Hutaam is like firewood. It's just like, you know, then hold on to that tightly. Gather the paltry things of the world, then hold on to it tightly. You know, like what? Like any piece of, like any fashion, for example. SubhanAllah, when you go to, you know, go to a secondhand store, go to the Eastern countries, many of them, you know, a lot of the Western clothes that they're wearing are hand-me-downs from people. that are sold, given to like Value Village and these places are then sold to the East. And the interesting thing is like you're looking at something that you could buy for a dollar and yet it costs the original person who bought it $150. And so they gathered all this fashion and how many cars, all the cars that we see. Look at an old beat up car. One day that was brand spanking new. One time that was brand spanking new. our computers, our devices, anything, even our own beauty or our own sense of beauty. We get old, we age, so all these things that we're trying to gather are things that don't last. So he saw people gathering all these things and then holding onto them so tightly that you don't want to let it go. While Allah has said, what is with you will end and what is with Allah will last, will ever last. it is everlasting so I spent what I gathered of this world for Allah Most High's sake and divided it among the poor right he took all his his wealth and divided among the poor so it could be a treasure trove for me with Allah Most High because he said like wait a second all this stuff that I have that I don't need he's not saying I'm not gonna eat food he's saying what all this excess I have what do I need it for so he gave it away and he said when I give it to Allah Then it's with Allah, right? Whatever you people have will end. But what is end Allahi? Baq. Whatever is with Allah. So he said, I'll give it to Allah by giving it to the poor. And this is why they say, subhanAllah, they say that you should really respect the poor person. You should really respect the poor person because they are the means of accepting your charity. And because they accepted your charity, it's a means of you depositing it with Allah. So when you put it into the hands of a poor person, or when you click that donate now, or when you put it into a box, or you just give someone some food, whatever it is, then you are actually that person is the, is the outward manifestation of the place where Allah's pleasure is. And Maulana Rumi actually says something very, very interesting as well in his poetry. Let me see if I remember it. Yeah. He says the essence of giving charity to someone who's poor is basically like how we are with Allah. We're completely impoverished to Allah. And Allah is the richest in that sense and all powerful, all generous. And so when we see a poor person, we give something to them, it is actually the thing in the world that reminds us most of the fact that we all have a generous Lord over us who's giving to us constantly and we're completely poor. And so he said that the manifestation of this essential relationship with humanity and Allah or all of creation and creator is found in the poor person. And so you have to really respect the poor so much because Allah has made them the metaphor or the example of what he is like to the rest of his creation. SubhanAllah. SubhanAllah. And then he says, then the fourth wisdom, and with that we might, okay, let's see how far we go. So is it fourth or third? We're on the fourth, right? Yeah, we'll find in the Rabia in your to bad al-Khalq, one nashrafahu wa izahu fi kathratil aquam, wal ansar, wal ashair. Fakhtar Rabi him, wazan wa akhiruna, anna hoofi kathratil amwali, wal awlad. Faftakhar Rubiha Wa hasaba 'adoohum Annahu fi ghadabi amwal fi ghasbi amwal nas Wa zulmihi wa safkudima'ihi wa atakkudat ta'ifatun ukhra Annahufi itlafilmal Wa israfihi wa tabzirihi wa ta maltu fee kolihi ta'ala in Akramaakum Ainna Allahi at Qaakum Faqtaltu taqwa wa atakkatu Anna al-Quran Haqqun Sadiqun wa the nuhum wa hisa wa husbanuhum So he says in this, in the fourth benefit that I saw that some of some people, right, let's see if we have this down. Yeah, some people thought basically that honor and glory was in having a large tribe or nation, having a lot of helpers and having a lot of backup and became proud through them. I'm part of a big family. I'm part of a big, I have a lot of friends. I'm in a big gang, whatever it is. And I found some people found that their honor and their glory was through that. And others thought it was through resources of wealth and many offspring and became proud through that, right? So offspring in that time, as you know, were considered like a wealth because there are people that helped you, the people that increased your number. So some people found that honor and pride was through having a big family and through wealth. Still others thought glory and honor was in taking people's wealth and oppressing them and shedding their blood. So a few people even became tyrants and felt that when you conquer other people, when you take over them, you invade them and you display your might over them, that that is honor and glory. And a group believed it was in spending wealth wastefully and extravagantly. Some people said, what honor is, is when I have a bunch of money and I can just waste it all over the place and show off my wealth. They thought this was honor. So I pondered what Allah said, the most noble of you in the Quran, the most noble of you in front of Allah is the most God fearing of you. The one who is most God conscious of you, God fearing of you. And so I chose God fearing this out of all those different ways of thinking that you're noble. Allah said, the most honorable of you in the sight of Allah is the God fearing. So he said, instead of choosing all these other ways to have honor and glory, I chose to have honor and glory through fearing Allah, meaning consciousness of Allah. As I believe the Quran is true and their estimations, meaning all of them, All those different ways that they have, whether it's through career or whether it's through beauty, whether it's through money, whether it's through friends and backup, social media followers, whether it's through political clout, whatever it is, all are false and diminishing, all will go away. So inshallah with that, there are four other wisdoms that he picks up, but we'll continue them next week, inshallah, and we'll leave some time for questions now. If anyone has any questions, we'll see.
