Bismillahir Rahman Al-Raheem Alhamdulillahir Abdul Alameen Wa Sallallahu Ala Saidam Muhammad Wa Ali Wa Sahbi Ajmaeen Subhanakala Ailmala Ailam Alamtuna Inna Kantal Alimul Hakim Allahuma Alimna Mayin Fauna Wan Fa'ana Bimaatu Alimna Wa Zindamin Fadlika Ailmala Ta'alima Inna Ka'ala Kulushayn Khadira Sallallahu Ala Saidam Muhammad Wa Ala Ali Wa Sahbi Wa Salam Wa Rahmatullahi Wa Barakatim Alhamdulillah, we are on lesson #9 of Imam Al-Ghazali's dear beloved son or oh son and in this lesson which we're going to call language of the heart you'll see why Imam al-Ghazali continues we didn't actually finish the last lessons advices so let's get to that where Imam al-Ghazali said if you remember in the last slide that we had, that we left off with, you asked me about, you asked me about Tawakkal, he's writing his student saying, you asked me about Tawakkal and what he was saying was that it is ingrained belief in what Allah has promised. It's something that is deep inside you and you know that Allah will give you and provide for you exactly as he has promised. As Allah says, we know in the Quran that that whoever places their firm reliance and total tawakkal in Allah then he is their sufficiency not that he gives them their sufficiency Allah himself is their sufficiency right because the one who has tawakkal in Allah there's a connection that they have to Allah and so Allah Allah himself becomes not the one who just provides everything but becomes everything to that person right the the biggest thing that Allah can provide to us is are those things which please Him right the best things we can ask from Allah are those things that Allah wants from us and so we know as well Allah says that there is no beast there is no creature on this earth except that upon Allah is its risk its risk is what is regular sustenance And so tawakkul is this ingrained belief that it is exactly what Allah promised you will get. As the Prophet said, talked about, you know, if we had the correct tawakkul on Allah, right, with the way that he's deserved to be relied upon, Allah would provide for us like he provides for the birds. They go out of the nest, empty bellied, hungry. and they come back with a full belly. Before birds go out in the day, they don't have like a to-do list, they don't have like a list of all the tasks they're gonna do and they don't have a list of emails that they have to open up and then seek the risk through that or worry about what customers they're gonna see. They literally go out trusting in Allah look for their sustenance on the earth, take whatever was written for them and come back. satisfied and they live their lives like that hamdulillah so Now it could be said somebody could object right that but however we see many people right that they are they are under distress in the matter of the risk and And you know, they're not they don't they don't earn anything and so Imam the car commentator says well, what about that? You know people who you know if you put trust in Allah and then what we say is that no then there may have been some type of nuqs or deficiency in the way that they put their trust in Allah And so that so we do not say that they put their trust fully in Allah and Allah let them down now not at all But perhaps that there was something that was in their Tawakkal itself that Allah that was not there right and so therefore we can't judge but we don't know what's going on exactly between servant and and Lord but that's there's an objection that somebody might bring up and going on we also we also talked about where it says what is for you will reach you without any doubt even if everyone in the world strives to divert it from you and what is not for you will not reach you even if everyone in the world helps you so you should never think If you had something coming towards you, then you don't say, oh, it was because I'm so good, I'm so smart, I deserve it. It's because Allah wanted it for you, and if everyone wanted to take it away from you, they wouldn't be able to do that. However, what does not reach you? You miss that deal. You don't get that job promotion. You don't get into that school that you wanted to get into. The person you proposed to didn't accept. Even if everyone in the world tried to put in a word for you, or even tried with all their strength, to get that thing that you wanted, if Allah didn't write it for you, and if you didn't get it, it means it was not written for you. And so this is the benefit of tawakkul, what's the real benefit of it, is that it helps Muslims, they try and they strive, and when they don't make it, they're not down about it. This is the big benefit of tawakkul, right? There's a practical benefit to it, which is that we keep trying to do good and get things that we need, But when we fail or when we don't get through what we want, get what we want, then it doesn't destroy us. It doesn't ruin us or make us feel deflated. And somebody might say that Tawakko sounds like you're trying to say that you shouldn't earn anything at all, that you shouldn't try. So that means you just sit at home. And don't go out to work, don't try to apply for school, don't apply yourself in your education. If you're trying to get married, don't look around and that it'll all come to you. And this is not the madhab of Ahlul Sunnah. This is actually not the madhab of Ahlul Sunnah. Because the madhab of Ahlul Sunnah is that it is fard to go out and to seek your rizq or to seek the things that you need to strengthen your body to worship Allah . Right. So we should not be fooled by this at all about what tawakkul means. Right. And a lot of the Ulama, they actually condemned the idea of, you know, to go into a desert without any provisions whatsoever. Some people felt that this was a way of testing their tawakkul. You know, I'm going to go into a desert and go into a journey without any water, without any food. And in one sense, this is kind of like you're testing Allah now, or you're saying that I have enough tawakkul and I'm gonna do this. And the Allah said, no, you don't put yourself in that position. Rather you tie your camel and then you put your trust in Allah as the hadith goes. And part of tawakkul and part of our rizq is the effort that we put towards it. So we keep thinking like, okay, so if someone doesn't work, They don't get any money. So they weren't provided for. Yeah, but they also were not, they were not given that the effort as well to do that. So the effort as well, the asbab or the means that we take is part of how we get our risk. It's not independent from that. It's not independent from that. And the proof of that is that all of the prophets, there's no one who had a higher sense of tawakko than the prophets. And yet still, they had jobs. They had jobs. The Prophet when he was young, he was a shepherd. If he didn't have any need, if it was all about tawakkul and not doing anything or working, then why would he have taken that job as a shepherd? So he had a means of income. Khadija was a businesswoman, right? Even after the Prophet's mission began, she continued to conduct and transact trade. And then Imam al-Ghazali continues, And you have asked me about sincerity, okay? Wahuwa and sincerity is An takuna a'amaluka kulluha lilahi ta'ala And it is that all of your works be for Allah Most High. What is Ikhlas? What is... It's the essence of Ikhlas is that all of your works be for Allah Alone Most High. Wala yartaahu qalbuqabi Muhammad anas And that you find no That your heart finds no gratification in the praise of people. So you're not actually like is that it's the idea of relaxing, right? It's when it says it means relax, right? So what it means is your heart doesn't relax. When you get praised by people, whenever you're not sure if your new haircut is looking that good, or if the clothes that you're wearing are nice, or the presentation you made was so good, if the food you cooked was so good, and someone says to you, hey, that was great, or that looks good, or you did good, what happens? Immediately your heart relaxes. Oh, okay, thank you. You know why? Because a compliment from somebody gives this kind of ease to the heart. That's why it's good to give compliments to people, it's good, but is that you like we're talking about like the ultimate the ideal class is that you you you don't need the pat on the back from people of course on the way as we're growing spiritually the pats on the back that we get from people we don't interpret that as praise for us we interpret that as praise for Allah the fact that he gave us those good deeds so if we do something good We don't see it as a praise. If someone says, Hey, mashallah, you recite a Quran very nicely, or you did this very nicely, or that very nicely, or mashallah. We just say, Alhamdulillah. However, we feel that comfort because the way when someone praises you for something, because the way that we should interpret it is that Allah Himself is giving His approval to us for something. That's how you make it so that you stop seeing the person giving you the praise. You say, Okay, thank you, Allah. Allah is saying to you, keep going. But there comes a time in the person's spiritual journey that they're doing it so much for Allah that whether they get the praise of people or not, doesn't matter. They will continue to worship Allah. Whether anybody says, good job, great. So for example, when you're a child, when I come home, my kids have cleaned the table, mashallah, they did the dishes, mashallah, that's great. May Allah bless you for that. That's awesome, right? But if I wipe the table, and my wife comes in and says, oh, thank you for doing that. What am I going to say to her? You don't have to thank me for that. That's what I'm supposed to do. If I don't do it, it's my shortcoming, right? Why? Because I'm not looking for the praise of my wife anymore to do those things. I see it as my duty. In the same way, when worshiping Allah or doing something good, you see it as your duty. You don't wait for the expectation or the praise from someone else. So it is that your heart doesn't find any gratification in people's praise. And that you feel no distress in their condemnation. When they put you down, you don't feel distressed. And sometimes messing up in front of people when that happens, first of all, anybody is naturally distressed when someone puts them down, right? Even for a dunya we think, you'd feel distressed. When someone says something as simple as, like I told you, like when I went out wearing a nice thobe and a sweater or like a thing, and a non-Muslim saw me and he said, well, you know, your dress looks good. He goes, but your shoes are off. And I was wearing Crocs that day because I had to run out for for Jummah, nothing against Crocs. I wear them, but I mean, it was a mismatch. And so I felt like, oh my gosh, you pointed that out, and I felt like, no, I can't rest until I buy shoes, good shoes to wear with that, for example. So you felt like a distress at someone's condemnation. But it's not just in Dunyui things, because in Deen you feel pretty distressed when somebody puts you down. when someone says to you brother when you're reciting Quran you could have said it like this this this you made a mistake or when someone tells you sister you're not wearing your hijab properly you're not supposed to be showing your whatever someone criticizes you just feel like you feel bad about it if not angry and so what they're saying is that you don't even see that anymore it's not that you don't care about people it's not that you I don't care whatever I'm gonna do what I wanna do that's funny because in this whole in this whole kind of culture, modern culture of like, I'm gonna do what I want and I don't care. And this whole idea of anybody who doesn't like it, then too bad. But they love the praise of people. So it's from one side, like I'm gonna be true to myself, I'm gonna be real. And then it's like, at the same time, but you love it when people praise you. So you have to get rid of that other side too. And when you do it just to be real, they can do it to be real to themselves for what they like or what they're passionate about. Can't we do it to be real to Allah ? Can't we also say, oh Allah, whether I get the likes for this one, or whether I get the thumbs down and the bad comments or the trolls, I don't carry Allah. Whether my, I don't know, your family member, your cousin or your in-laws or whatever criticizes me for XYZ, or whether I get a compliment, I'm doing it for you, oh Allah. And so this is the whole thing. It's about not feeling bad when people put you down, because the other thing is sometimes when we realize this, that, okay, we're gonna get put down, then we can prepare ourselves as well. That when you feel, and remember being put down is not just about a condemnation. It could just be falling in people's eyes. Sometimes you have to bask in that moment. You know, like for example, you know, you know, like I remember once, you know, I walked into my, we were in Jordan and we had some domestic help in Jordan and, you know, and The sister would soap the floors and the floors are kind of like tiles. And so I was out, maybe at work, and I walked in very, very quickly to my house, kind of like rushing to get something. She probably wasn't expecting me there. I walked in and I just took a huge wipe out on the ground. Like just imagine soapy tiles. I just wiped out completely, slipped and bam. And all I could hear, this sister wore a very, very, very, very, modest, and all I could hear was like giggling in the other room. I don't blame her. Thinking to myself, man, like, yeah, anybody, anybody would like to impress someone else and act like, you know, you composed and you're all whatever. And then you just get like, no matter what you feel like, yeah, I'm the, I'm the, I'm the. the one who's kind of like the head of the household or whatever. No, you're on the ground in soapy water, dirty soapy water, like flat on your back. And someone's laughing at you in the next room. And then you just realize like, maybe Allah is trying to show me something. Maybe Allah is trying to tell me, just take it easy a little bit. It happens as well. And when that happens, for example, like if you're reciting Quran, you forget a line, you make a mistake, sometimes you just have to sit back and say, oh Allah, I'm not perfect. You're perfect. Oh Allah doesn't matter what people think of me. So the thing is like instead of being sad about how people think or how they condemn you because it's harder condemnation is harder to get over than it is to get over people not having praise. It's harder when someone looks down on you. So you just think to yourself that's the time when you say okay how do you disconnect from that because you say that you're going to connect to Allah in that. And so you look for the reward from Allah and the connection to Allah. And so that softens the idea that you're getting criticized by people, right? And then know, Imam Ghazali continues, that Riya, showing off. And just know, right, that showing off or ostentation, what does it mean? What it means, what is showing off an ostentation? It means to do something for the sake of created beings, for them to see it's the opposite of khlas, that's what showing off is. That it comes out, what does it come out of? Showing off stems from glorifying people. It comes when people loom large in your eyes. That's when you show off. You don't show off to the trees, right? No one stands in front of, you know, no one, no one, if they are, you know, if you have a small baby, you know, you're not trying to act cool in front of a baby. Or if you have a cat, no one tries to show off in front of their cat, because whatever, you don't see it as being of any consequence, what they think you don't care. So why do you show off? It is born from this idea that people are something, especially your peers. This is why people show off in front of their peers. Sometimes you can run into the supermarket dressed like anyway, who cares, dressed like whatever. But if you go into your workplace or whatever, and I'm not saying you shouldn't dress decently, but as an example, it's because you care about what people think. Why do you care about what they think? 'Cause they seem important to you. And they seem like, so there's nothing wrong with trying to look good for people, for Allah's sake, but in front of people, but showing off is not talking about those physical things. Riyah when Imam Ghazali is talking about Riyah as we mentioned he's actually he doesn't consider showing off in worldly things even Haram or impermissible you would think it is it's not according to him disliked okay not good that's right but the Haram one is to show off in your Deen it's to show off in your Ibadah to other people because that's when you do things for other than Allah and that's when you're sharing between Allah and your intention and other people so this is why think about this he's talking about these three things He's talking about these three things. Why? Because he's saying that a scholar is gonna come across these things. A student of knowledge or a scholar, you need to have trust in Allah in this journey. You need to know that Allah is the one who's gonna provide for you in this journey and not keep thinking that your means. Otherwise, if you just pursue the means only, then honestly, people wouldn't even go into this line of endeavor, of saluk, of ilm, of teaching, of learning, Or if they go into it for the purposes of earning a buck, they miss the point of it completely. So that's one thing. So he talked about istiqama, right? First he talked about istiqama, about being consistent and straight with yourself. That's the first thing people have to remember as a student of knowledge. The second one is tawakkul, you got to trust in Allah. And you got to know that don't worry about it, not just in a student of knowledge, but being religious. Because being religious, meaning being devout to Allah in our times means you may have to give up something from the dunya. I mean, you may. It's that job offer that's like, it's such a good job offer, but they want me to do a little bit of haram. And you say, I don't wanna do it. Or if you say, I could probably look so much better if I just modified my body like this, but then you say, I'm not gonna do it, whatever it is. right as Allah the prophet said whoever loves their dunya harms their akhira whoever loves their next life their akhira harms his dunya a little bit right because you have to sacrifice so prefer that which is going to last forever over that which is going to go which is going to which is ephemeral and will one day finish and end And so then the next thing he talked about was Ikhlas. You have to have Ikhlas, and now he's talking about Riyah. And the cure or the treatment for Riyah and showing off. That you see that all people are just subjects of divine power, the divine Qudra of Allah , meaning they are completely conquered and led by the power and the might of Allah. just like you know like a dog or a cat like you don't show off to a dog or a cat because we have complete control over those beings you're not trying to impress them in the same way you're trying to impress people because you think they have the power to like you or the power to accept you to give you access to things to give you their approval and so you show off to them so the minute you realize no this person is completely in the control of Allah they can't give me anything independent anything And then you realize if it's Allah who's really gonna give me approval or not, or good things or not, or a job or not, you say, why do I need to show off in front of this person? Why do I need to show off in front of this person? And it just happens, like for example, when you realize, for example, people don't show off in front of their spouses, they get so used to them, they take them for granted, to show off in front of complete non-Mahram, or they'll be you know for example the shaitan will come for that why because you you already feel like there's nothing I there's nothing new to have here but there's something else new you want there and this is what showing off is in fact for for showing off for Allah's with with you know in ibada is even worse than that and then he said so the ilaj is to see them completely subdued and controlled by the divine ability and you Consider them like inanimate objects. So this person of the opposite gender is in front of you. Should I show off? Should I look a little better? The Shaitan's telling you, desire. Say, whatever, dude, this is like a stone to me. What are they really? Just a lump of flesh that came into the world in a dirty way, leave the world in the ground, who cares? And there's many other ways to see people like the Ulama have also explained as well, sometimes you just see everyone dead, just realize everyone is gonna be gone. Everyone. Why am I showing off to a bunch of people who are not going to be in this world? Oh, I'm not either, so... Okay. So then therefore you say, there's no reason to show off. So you see everybody as a jamid object, as an inanimate object. That has no power at all. That cannot give you, a stone cannot give you comfort, nor can it cause problems in your life. So you see it as inconsequential. And so why? In order to stop showing off to them. In order to stop showing off to them, you see them like this, right? So you'd stop caring about them. And as long as you reckon or you think that they have power and will for themselves, showing off will never be far from you. Because you will always think that this person can give me something that I can get from them and not taking it from Allah. So the cure is to see them as subjects of divine power, like inanimate objects. And whenever you think people possess power and will, showing off will always be near to you. The next section, Imam Ghazali says, Ayuhalwalad, dear son or child, As for the remaining issues that you asked, he's coming to the end of the Risala. As for the remaining issues that you asked about, Some of the things that you've asked about are written about in my books. Imam Ghazali is saying, this is towards the end of his career, right? And he's saying, go find those answers in the books that I've written. In the Ikhi alumuddin, in Minhaj al-Abideen, in Bidaat al-Hidai, in Munqid min al-Balara. Or maybe that was written after this, I'm not sure. In other books like that. Find the answers there, because I've written about them. Wa kitaba tuba adiha haram. And other things that you've asked about, writing about them would be haram. It would be impermissible. I can't write about these things that you asked about. Why? Number one, either because the expression and words are not comprehensive enough to do justice. Either what it means is there's no words that can spell out the exact answer that you're doing. Language does not have the ability to do it. Or because my saying this is not permissible to someone who's not at the level to understand. As the saying goes, was it a hadith? I have to double check. That to address people according to the level of their intellect. So you don't go up to someone, you know, and start speaking to them in a way that they will not understand or that they will purposely misunderstand you. You don't go up to someone who's been traumatized by something and start talking to them just casually about that thing. It's an unintelligent thing to do. You hurt someone's feelings, for example. Or you don't go espousing things. You don't go to a country and start talking to them. It would be like introducing things to people that they're not ready for. You don't go to a child and start talking about the birds and the bees when they're not ready to hear it. Why? Because it would be haram to say certain things. to a mind that's not completely developed and able to handle it, right? And so imagine if we can do that in what they call like, you know, PG-13, adult accompaniment, whatever it is, there's some things that you just don't show or speak about with someone who's not ready to understand them because it can cause them more harm than good. And sometimes, sometimes as well, it may mess with their Aqidah. It may mess with their understanding. so for example right and an example of this is that some of the in the books of some of the spiritual scholars the the the masters they talk about like the people's trajectory to Allah as souls and in some ways that people if people who are uninitiated and untrained when they listen when they read those books they literally cannot understand and they're like you know what this is just this sounds like Kufr to me and this is why traditionally Some of the kind of more literalist minded scholars, may Allah bless them because they were involved in certain fields but not other fields. But when they started to look into other fields that were not their own, they were not prepared for the nomenclature, the terminology, the usul, the understanding of what this other scholar is talking about. And so they went into the spiritual sciences and they opened their books and they said, this doesn't make any sense, what's going on? You know, how does this make sense? And then they would condemn. And so this is why Imam Ghazali is saying, SubhanAllah, I mean, this is way before all that stuff is happening. He's saying, don't, I can't write some of this stuff because either you won't understand it right now or words cannot even express it and I will fail in doing that, right? And, , or he's saying that it's a matter of , it's a matter of spiritual experience, as we said before. We talked about that before and or it's a matter of ecstasy. It's a matter of remember how we talked about that, you know, ultimate worldly pleasure that you can't define. You just have to experience it if you know, otherwise you can't explain it. And those only those qualified can experience that. Right. And so he's saying that you're not qualified yet. So when that occurs, then will be the time that neither will I need to write about it, nor will I need to speak about it. And this is what the You know, in the same way that when you meet a fellow believer, this is just on the basis of pure Iman. Have you ever met a fellow believer and you look in their eyes, you don't know them and they look in yours, you smile, you say Salam. Something strange, but you just know that you feel good about having Iman. You know, when you come across a Muslim and you're not expecting and you feel good, right? Or you're at Hajj or Umrah, you know, and you just did your rights. And I'm happy and the other person's happy too. And you can tell there's something in our hearts about being in this place, being near the Kaaba, being in Medina. We just love it. We don't even need to say it. This is the whole point. When both sides understand and they're qualified to understand, neither will you need to write about it, nor will you need to speak about it. And this is what Imam Al-Ghazali is saying, just get there, son, and it'll answer itself. Allahu Akbar. Right. And the people who are who reach that level, as you know, our spiritual masters tell us, they can tell someone who knows Allah like that, can tell when they meet somebody else who knows Allah like that. Allah knows what that's like. But they know the people who are like them. They know where to unfold and give out their secrets. Right. That's why they say permissible for its own people. haram for other people, because they just won't get it. And then he says, Yaamal anta bimaa ta'alam Work, you work on what you know. Work on the knowledge that you have. Liyaan kashiva la kamaa laa ta'alam So that what you do not know can be unveiled to you. This is what Imam Al-Ghazali is pointing towards. Don't ask some of these questions, I'm not gonna answer them. Hold on for me to do that right now. But just act on what you have learned in your life. Not only all the studies that you've done, but these advices I've given you, act on what you know so what you do not know and the answers to your questions and more will be revealed to you. So now he's saying that the step to getting the answers is not always to ask, it's to act. It's to do. Islam is a deen of knowledge, but it's a deen of putting knowledge into practice. And he says, he says, . And he ascribed to the Prophet , right? However, in the Tahqiq, they're saying that they have not found it. connected but they didn't indicate that they found it connected back to the Prophet they found it in Ibn Asakir's Tariq Dibashq and as a statement of Imam Al-Awzai and as a part of the statement of Fuldayl ibn Yad as well that whoever acts upon what they know right whoever let's get that up here whoever acts upon what they know Allah makes them inherit the knowledge of what they did not know Whoever acts upon what they know, Allah makes them inherit knowledge of what they did not know. And that's why, that's why. Sometimes the most profound scholar or profound spiritual master is not always the most book studied one. It's not always the one who's most learned in books. Book knowledge is amazing. And when you sit with the people of book knowledge, you're very edified. And there's a lot of piety and a lot of learning there. But the spiritual masters, while they are scholars many times, they're speaking on a level that just blows your mind. Like, where is that in the books? And when you relay that information to other people, which you shouldn't always do, they ask you, where is that in the book? Show me that in the book. And you know it's haq, you know it's truth. It shines with the light of the Quran and Sunnah. And you're just like, how did they pull that out? It's a penetrating insight. Sometimes they will know the answers to things, whether it's a commentary on an ayah or hadith through that light that Allah has given them because they acted on things that they knew and Allah gave them a wisdom and a knowledge that they did not know, right? Of course, that's always in line with the Sharia. There's no difference in between that. And then he says, Ayuhulwalat, dear child or son or child. Baad al yom la tas la tas al nima ashkala alaika illa bisil be lisan al janan now listen to this taking a completely different turn now. Okay. And he's kind of like embarking now on his, what I would say is pretty much he's in a, you know, we're on lesson number nine. We have up to 12. He's now embarking on the last quarter. It's the last quarter. He's taking it on a different level as well. He's after today, after today, do not ask me about what you find difficult except through the language of the heart. SubhanAllah. What is he saying? I mean, here's a student of knowledge, a scholar in his own right, asking him questions, and he's saying, after today, don't ask me, except with the language of the heart. Something that, what is language of the heart? It's the Lisan al-Haal, this is Lisan al-Maqal, the language of the tongue is Lisan al-Maqal. He's saying, Lisan al-Haal, is how you should ask me, you should ask me with your spiritual state, come to me, perhaps he's saying, like a spiritual master might tell his disciple, come to me with that state, bring that to me, and then let's deal with that, those issues, right, let's deal with that. As they say, that the state, the tongue of your spiritual state is even more eloquent than the tongue of your mouth, than the tongue of speech. There are things that people can say to each other through their states, as we said, that you could never describe, even if you were given a million pages to do so. And he's saying that he's saying that basically don't come to me just with questions alone. He's also saying with actual verbal questions, that's not what it is. It's have patience until the purpose unfolds to you. And that's part of what he's saying at some point in time. the questions go away or they should go away and it's just waiting to see that you have something in your heart and Allah will show it to you and subhanAllah a lot of the students of the spiritual path and about of knowledge you know because you should always be both you know they say that they would sit in the lectures of their teachers and in the majalis of their teachers and they had questions and they were not able to ask them and just by being patient and sitting through that lecture Sometimes the answer to what they were asking came without them having to ask. Or they were not given the opportunity to ask and they thought, I won't get my question answered. Or they said, the topic of discussion is not what I am wondering today. And the topic of discussion could completely turn. and you get the answer. And the answer might even be, you wouldn't even believe. The answer might even be in the Ishara of your Sheikh. It might even be in a simple look, in a simple gesture, in a simple, in something they give you, in something that happens in the world. And you realize, oh my SubhanAllah, Allah is giving you messages through how creation is behaving because your questions are getting beyond that point of writing it down and answering and discursive knowledge. It's not about the brain. And what's the whole point of that? 'Cause sometimes when you have that practice on that knowledge, it's because it's a sign that look, your mind has to be used, Allah gave us an Aql, but it's not the main thing, it's the heart. So you have to start reading the answers, not only from the eyes in the books and the minds in the concepts, but the heart in the entire, in your existence, in your experience. You have to be open to that. Because sometimes, subhanAllah, you could learn a masala and then it plays out in front of you. You could learn a point of knowledge. When it plays out in front of you, that has the bigger impact than the point in the book. So he's saying that from now on, don't ask me anything except from the language of the heart. And this is exactly why we called this lesson, the language of the heart. And then he says, well, and then now Muhammad Ali does something kind of interesting. in the next kind of four lines, in this paragraph of where he says . He's gonna give Quranic ayahs that mean something else outwardly in tafsir, but are pointing back to what he's saying. And this style of tafsir, just last week, we talked in the Ahya al-Umudin about the tafsir al-Ishari, the indicative tafsir. It's a tafsir that's not the outward meaning, but it's the inward meaning that also goes along with the outward meaning. So he says, he says, Don't ask me except by the tongue of the hearts. ... in Surah Al-Hujraat, for example, Allah says, And if they had patience until you come out to them, O Prophet, that would have been better for them. Because people used to stand, the ayah is talking about people standing outside the room of the Prophet calling him to come outside, it was rude behavior. So Allah was saying, if those people just waited till you came out to ask for their needs, it would have been better for them. Here Imam al-Ghazali is taking that to show, sometimes you want to knock and ask the question before it's time, let it come out and it'll be better for you. Let it come forth. And then he says, he says, and accept the advice of Khidr who went on the journey with Musa. What is the ayah? Falaatas alni'anin shayin hatta okhditha lakaminhu dhikra. And Khidr said to Musa And do not ask me about anything until I myself bring forth the mention of the matter, until I introduce the matter to you. And so he's saying, indirectly, he's applying what Khidr said to his disciple. And he's telling him, just like Khidr told Musa, Come with me on the journey, you're going to see a lot of things. But don't ask me about anything until I tell you. He's saying to the disciple as well, wait until I tell you about this stuff. Don't start to ask me about everything, right? And then he says, do not be in a rush. Ibn Ghazali says, Do not rush. Until to the point where when you reach the right time, it will be unveiled to you, the answers will be unveiled to you and you will be shown, you will be shown. And then he quotes the ayah again, in a tafsir, that is not the exact meaning, but it's an indicative spiritual indication. Sa'urikum ayati falatas ta'ajilun Allah says, And I will show you all my signs. So do not rush me, do not demand that I make haste. And then Imam Ghazali says the last ayah in this section, Falatas al-Qabd al-Waqq So don't ask about things before the right time. Right? Why? Because as they say, in Fiqh they apply this principle as well. Whoever rushes something before its time is punished or is deprived, is basically punished with being deprived of it. So what is an example? I mean, if you put cake batter inside the oven and you take it out before it gets baked, You get deprived of a cake, you don't have a cake, because you took it out. In the same way, some things, whether it's prayer, you know, you finish the prayer before you say the Salams, or you have an unsound prayer. So why? Because you rushed something, and so you were deprived, your punishment was that you're deprived of it. So in the same way, he's saying, don't ask about things and rush them such that you will be deprived of actually experiencing them. Because you're being impatient for the answer. And according to what some of the spiritual scholars I've heard as well, is that many people give up because they're like, I'm not feeling it. I'm not feeling it. Where is it? When is it coming? Like I've been doing the spiritual thing for a long time now. I read all the books, I got all the gear, I'm wearing the hat, I've got the beads. Where is it now? And it's like, just patience, hold on. You know, it's going to come at the time when Allah wants, not the time you want, because that's the whole point. If you keep wanting it and demanding at that time and demanding it must be there or else I'm going to leave this path or whatever, then it's like saying, okay, then go. That's why one of the, in the book of advice to the student, this ilm of ours, whoever wants to leave it for one moment, let him leave it now. Like if you're not, you know, so this is why they say like, uh that uh you know that you know the words to the oh you lovers oh lovers of Allah subhana take a take a covenant with us right that um that you're never going to get bored that you're not going to give up in seeking your beloved make a deal with us right now if you really love, if you really claim to love, that you're not going to get bored. You're not going to get sick and fed up and give up in this way, right? So, then Imam Ghazali says, And do not, and have certainty, absolute certainty, right? That, that you will not reach And in some manuscript it says you will not reach that time, or you could say you will not reach Allah, or the answers about what you want from Allah. You will not reach that time when things are revealed to you, except by traveling. It's not gonna come to you. It's not like a home delivery, you know, like I call and the groceries come to my house. It just doesn't work like that. You have to traverse, you have to journey, you have to go on a path, it's a tariq. And so he's saying that just be sure that you know this. If you think you'll sit back and it'll come to you, it won't work like that. You have to travel. And in order to travel, what do you have to do to travel anywhere? Put on your shoes, you put on your jacket, you get your money, you get your passport, whatever it is. You get ready, you get the things that you need, and then you take the means and the effort. Traveling is not easy to get from one place to another. If you had to walk from here, from my house of seekers guidance, I mean, it would be a pretty, you know. You know, it's a long walk, for example. So in the same way, don't think that you're going to get there, but know. But know that if you do travel, that, you know, there's that thing. And again, he uses an ayah. Awalam yasiru fil ardifayan zuru kaifa kana aqiba. You know, do they not travel in the earth? Do they not traverse? So, sorry, I've been, I haven't been doing the slides. So, I'll get back to the ayah do not be in a rush when you reach the right time it will be unveiled and you will be shown right now have they not journeyed through the land and seen that's what that's what Imam Ghazali is saying Allah uses this ayah to say have the people not gone through the land to see the ruins of Thamud and Aad to show to show that people were living here before they got destroyed because they didn't believe in Allah Allah is telling that now Imam Ghazali is using that ayah to show you that you need to journey in order to see things. That's a proof that you need to journey in order to see things. And so he's applying that to the spiritual path the way that the spiritual scholars did. They'd pull out spiritual meanings from the ayat that seemed to be directed towards something completely different. Then Imam Ghazali says, Ayyuhulwalad, oh dear child, billahi, I swear by Allah. He starts with an oath, by Allah, in tasir, If you travel spiritually, you will see wonders at every stop. SubhanAllah. He say, if you travel spiritually, I swear by Allah, you will see amazing, wondrous things at every single stop. And this is exactly what the spiritual scholars have been trying to tell the Ummah. that don't criticize something you don't understand. Don't say you don't believe in it, you don't like it. There is something more than just the ins and outs of practice. Although that's a very high thing. There's more. Travel spiritually through your practice and through your knowledge at the hands of people who have done it before and you will see wonders at every stop. What does this mean? First of all, it implies that there are many stops on the path. When you travel towards something, there are many stops. So it's not like you're just gonna start from A to B. It's not an A to B journey. If you got on the subway, on the tram or what do you call it, the tube, if you got on that and somebody or a train and the conductor said, okay, at every stop, you'll see something different. You'll say, wow, there's a lot of stops. Because it was just A to B. And this is the problem, people think that's just A to B. Like today I purchased my prayer beads, like tomorrow I should be a wali, or something like that. He's saying at every stop you're gonna see something, meaning there's a lot of stops. And it's also implying, not only are there many stops, but there are many stations as well. What does that mean? There are many different levels. And this is what he's implying, that as you go through, you will reach higher and higher levels of insights with Allah , right? And then he's saying, then he says, and spend your soul, expend your soul, put your soul into it. And because the essence of this matter is to expend your very soul. Give it your all. What does that mean? It means give it your all. When you get into this, just like for example, when you go into a marriage, you don't go in saying, all right, we'll try it. Let's see how we do. No, you jump into marriage for life. You say, I'm in with two feet. And same way with your dean. What do you do? You don't say, all right, let me see if I can hack it. I'll see if I can be religious. No, if you come in with that mentality, you're gonna go out 'cause the first time you slip, You'll say, oh, see, I suck. I can't do this. And in reality, it was about falling and realizing it's Allah who's gonna pick you up and take you, not you. So you fall and fall and fall. Sometimes a long time passes you, you slip again. You sin, you went back to something you had left long time ago. Allah reminding us, it's not you. It's you have to trust Allah. And so that expending your soul is to invest your all in it. Right? So, you know, as our Sheikh said, you know, it's like, you know, and it's basically like when someone says like, what's the price of this path that you have to pay? What is it to reach Allah and to be in the spiritual path and all this stuff? What do I gotta do? What do I gotta give? And the answer that I've heard from the spiritual masters is, what do you got? Everything you got, this is the whole thing, Allah wants everything from us. Right? Why? Because Allah created us. And Allah says, what is it? That Allah has purchased our souls and our lives in exchange for Jannah. That's Jannah. That's Jannah. What about Allah himself? What about Allah's good pleasure? What about experiential being with Allah? What is the cost of that? May Allah, so we can't even fathom that. So he's saying, give it your all. Give it your all. It is an expensive proposition. You have to spend of yourself. ... just like ... one of the very early spiritual masters said to one of his students... SubhanAllah, may Allah, you know, I have no... you know, SubhanAllah, I'm embarrassed to even have to read these words. I ask Allah to show us all the meaning inshAllah. of these words, subhanAllah. In qadrat al bazal ruh, if you are able to spend of your soul, then come. The noon was telling a student, if you're able to expand your soul, then come. Then otherwise, don't occupy yourself with the fantastical tales of the Sufis. If you're ready to come on the spiritual path and give it your all, come, like learn. and follow your teacher and learn from the spiritual scholars. But if not, if you're not ready to give it your all, then don't busy yourself with the fantastical tales and stories because that's what happens when spirituality becomes devoid of trying to do things for Allah. It just becomes like, oh, this is my spiritual music, oh, this is my spiritual stories, these are the miracles. And it's like, that's not really the point of the path. Right, that's not the point of the path. It's all those things come out of those miracles and those amazing stories. You see them along the way, you hear them, you benefit from them. But in reality, you must be in it with two feet and Allah knows best. Then Imam Hazali continues, where are we with our slides? And we'll just... Right, the Nuno Misri is saying. Now, then he says, Ayu halwalat, oh my dear, I'm advising you, I'm going to advise you with eight matters, eight advices. I'm going to give you advice. Accept it from me, accept it from me, take it from me, what I'm giving you right now. He's going to distill things into these eight things. Li'Allah yaqoonua almuqa' khusman alaik yaam alqiyamah Eight advices, take it from me so that your knowledge is not gonna be an opponent against you on the day of judgment. 'Cause as he said from the beginning, everything you learned, just going back to the beginning, everything you learned that you don't practice will be a knowledge, it will be against you on the day of judgment. The ill can complain to Allah, oh Allah, this person learned me, as the commentators say basically, this person learned me but didn't do anything, didn't apply me. So he's saying, take these eight knowledges from me. Four of these advices you do. And four of these advices is to stay away from, you desist. So do four things and stay away from four things. But what does he start from? He starts from the things that you stay away from. So he starts now and he says, there are four things to refrain from and four things to do. So the first thing to desist from, meaning don't do this, this is one of my advices. And the ulama talk about why is it that he started by talking about the things that you don't do. And the reason why he started talking about the things that you do not do is because it is more important to get rid of your bad habits than it is to start adorning yourself with good habits, which is . It is more important to get rid of the harm than to gain the benefit and there's more reward in getting rid of harm or haram or bad things than it is to start doing good things, right? Why? Because leaving something that is harmful is actually harder on you than doing something good. A lot of people can do extra good deeds, but to leave a haram habit of yours, that's tough. That's very tough, even if it's a small habit. It's very tough. That's why one of the spiritual scholars said, He said, good deeds? He says, the righteous people and the sinful people can do them, right? What is it? But no one leaves what is Haram except a true worshiper of Allah, Siddiq, right? This is why he started with the things that you desist from. Right? And as they say, to even leave an atom's weight of what Allah has made haram is better than the worship of the jinn and mankind put together. SubhanAllah. It's perhaps by way of, you know, that needs unpacking, but even to leave a small thing that is haram, because there's harm in it. If you don't do any favors to somebody, right? At least don't do harm to someone. That's the least thing. So, then he says, Ahaduha, the first thing, the first piece of advice, and we're not going to get into this completely, but just start with a little bit of it, because he goes on for a little while in this. And he says, ... As for those things that you leave, Ahaduha, the first thing is, Allah tu na'vira Ahadan fi masalatin mastathaat That you do not debate anyone. Okay, that you do not debate anyone on any matter. as much as you are able to subhanAllah don't debate anyone for anything and so this is this is an interesting thing to tell a scholar refrain from debate right refrain from debate why because there are so many calamities that come out of when a person starts debating with people What, you know, there's so many, but I mean, just, it happens. A nice bright student of knowledge, MashaAllah, such a nice demeanor, Noor on his face or her face, you know, good Akhlaq and everything. Then they decided to be the defender of all truth. And they got, you know, weighed down in debating with everybody and refuting this one, refuting that one, refuting this one. And then the rivalry started up in between the different, you know, within the groups. And then on the forums, they're debating people and the newer from their face, it's not the same anymore. They're dark. I mean, I shouldn't say dark, I should say the newer has left their face, right? And that they now begin to, instead of using their knowledge to promote the good and to do the good, they start using the knowledge to debate other people and to have one up competitions over other people. What is it that Imam Al-Ghazali says? Because debating in that way, its harm outweighs the good that it does. How many times do you see? And sometimes debate is important and good, and sometimes it benefits some people. But many times, like for example, debate, even sometimes like political debates between different groups of Muslims, you watch these debates and all that ends is just more hatred for each side. One side hates the other side more. Sometimes they even break down to fights. Sometimes it just breaks out into pandemonium. People are shouting and yelling, and this was the end of the debate. This is how debates are supposed to end. They all go back to review on YouTube reaction videos to the debate, and every side claimed that they won. Nobody changed their mind. And in fact, the people who you were against, rather than bringing them closer to you, they got further from you. Why? Because debate is the root of every blameworthy character trait. Like showing off, like envy, and pride, and enmity, and rancor and enmity, and trying to one up one another and vie with one another, and all those other things. Why? Because when you start debating each other, you want to look like more than the other person, so you show off. And when the other person has an eloquent point or they're very good at arguing or very knowledgeable, you wish you could be like them, so you envy them. And then when you do good and you win the debate, you get pride. And when you lose the debate, you get enmity, you hate the other person. right and when when you're preparing for the debate so what ends up happening is and this has happened so many times look at the debates online or don't look at them but if you really did in forums between religions and between Muslim groups eventually subhanAllah it descends into sometimes personal attacks ad hominem attacks sometimes the other side accuses the other side of even inventing lies can you imagine debating for the sake of Allah and then inventing lies about your opponent Trying to smear your opponent talking about their wife or their husband or trying to get into their finances or whatever it is So it becomes an act of it's literally just you're trying to take the other person down And he says now. Yes, Imam Ghazali says Yes, if some issue, a disagreement or question comes up between you and some other people, whether individuals or a group of people, and your intention is to reveal the truth. So the truth comes out, and so the truth is not lost, jazz, jazz al-baht. Then Investigating into a question, not debating, investigation is lawful. So Imam Al Ghazali says, if a disagreement comes up and you want to expose the truth and not neglect it, investigation is lawful. Baath, right? Even though in Urdu they call Baath, Baath is like arguing with each other, come from the term to investigate. So he's kind of saying that that's a more academic and a more sincere way of looking into a question. And then he says, and then he says, where are we? It's permissible to do that. In fact, the commentator says sometimes it may even be fardh to get into this polemical issue if you're the only one who can solve that problem and it needs to be solved. And so it's funny this is coming from Iman al Ghazali because he spent so much time refuting, you know, the bataniya, the muattazila, the philosophers, he spent so much of his career debating people through written works and refuting them. Why? Because, first of all, he did it for the haq, and he was at a level where, if it wasn't him, and he's called the proof of Islam. His nickname was the proof of Islam. So it means that he was at a level where if he didn't do it, there was a good chance that the truth would be lost. And that's why he had to do it. But going through debate himself, he's a master of it. He can tell you, and he's telling us, look, I've seen this. When you're young and you're a budding scholar or student, you wanna go in the masjid and argue with people, convince everybody why you're right and why they're wrong, but don't get it, I've seen it. And at the end, there's nothing but all of these things. He's saying, fine, if you have to do it, that's fine. But then he says, but there's conditions. He says, But this true will to seek the truth has two signs if you're true. The first of those signs, right? However, the desire for truth has two marks. Number one, indifference. Number one, he says, let me read it. That the indifference, you have indifference, you don't differentiate. whether the truth is revealed on your tongue or the tongue of someone else. So it does, it's not I have to make the point. If the other person makes the point and that's the truth, that's what you want. Imam Al-Ghazar was Imam Shafi said, I never debated anyone except that I wished that the truth would be manifest on their tongue. That's the Ikhlas that he had. And honestly, if anyone's been in a debate or disagreement publicly, It is very difficult to have that in your heart when you're debating. 'Cause the other person on the other side, you consider them deviant or wrong or incorrect, and you feel like I need to be right. Otherwise, if this person is right, then the truth will suffer, but it's not true. If it's actually true, even if it comes out of their mouth, you wouldn't mind it, right? You wouldn't mind it. And the Wathani and the second mark is that private inquiry is more beloved to you than public you would rather you would rather you would say okay I do want to debate you but I'd rather debate you in private not recorded no no recordings no phones just between me and you will reason it out and we'll try to get to the truth together if that's more beloved to you and you want him to the other person to speak the truth or whoever speaks the truth is fine then go into that inquiry because you can handle it. But there's a love that when you want to be right or show everyone, you want to bring it into a large audience. Now, sometimes that's also necessary, SubhanAllah. Sometimes because the Aqeedah of the common person is being messed up or messed with and you need to solve some problems and you're confident that you can do that or you're being challenged and everyone else is saying, You know, and the person's had an ability, they may be tried with this, but it's a very slippery slope. Imam Al-Ghazali is saying, refrain from debate on anything as long as you're able, because he has that experience. Don't get into it, because you'll end up compromising your Deen and your Ikhlas. And private inquiry is always better. And people who want the truth don't mind sitting together privately. It's when people want to air dirty laundry and take down their opponent. That's why they say, no, no, no, not privately, in front of everybody, you know, you know, on my channel, on your channel, you know, it used to be in this stadium or that masjid or whatever it is. And so this is a big, big problem that you don't want. SubhanAllah, I heard once about a debate between one of the great spiritual masters of the last century and a debate against one of the great scholars, Salafi scholars of the last century. And this spiritual scholar was being put down and criticized and critiqued and whatever. And finally they came face to face in Damascus and they said, okay, let's have a discussion. They agreed and said, okay, but as long as it's private, it's just me and just you. And they sat, they said, okay, they went into the house And within a couple of minutes, a couple of minutes, the spiritual master came walking out of the house and everything was finished. Everything was soft. But there was nothing to gloat over. There was nothing to one-up each other. There was no crowds to cheer and to clap and to egg you on. And that's how, SubhanAllah, that is the... of how the spiritual masters handled the debate whenever they could, right? Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam will continue on that point. It's still the first point from the debate. We'll take questions now or any comments if anyone has them. Inshallah. Anybody want to? Yeah. I don't know. The question was, what are the different levels of spirituality? I don't know. If I come across it from Imam Al-Ghazali, we'll read it. Otherwise, I'm not, I don't know. Other questions? Hopefully we'll get to it, inshallah. Hopefully we'll get to it. Okay. Shallah, are there any questions from the chat or from the forum? Oh, no, I meant I meant on the live. OK. Shallah, see you next time. Shallah, assalallahu alayhi wa sallamu alaykum warahmatullahi wa barakatuh.
