Alhamdulillahi Rabbil Alameen Wa Sallallahu Ala Saidam Muhammad Ala Ali Wa Sahbi Ajma'een Subhanakala Ailmalana Ilama Alamtana Inna Kantal Alim Hakeem Allahumma Alimna Mayan Fa'una Wan Fa'na Bimaatu Alimuna Wazidnum in Fadlika Ailnuna Ta'alima Inna Ka'ala Qulshayn Qadir Wa Sallallahu Alaisayn Muhammad Ali Wa Sahbi Salamu Alaikum wa Rahmatullahi Wabarakatu Alhamdulillah, we are now on lesson seven of Imam Al-Ghazali's Ayyuh Al-Walad, dear beloved son explained or oh son or dear child. Advice for living right and this gathering is called this session is called recognizing a true spiritual guide. So if you remember where we last left off Imam Al-Ghazali is speaking about his citing for his senior student the eight advices the eight advices that were given by Shaykh Iqal Balkhi, sorry, from Hatim al-Assam, Shaykh Hatim al-Assam who was the companion of Shaykh Iqal Balkhi, who kept his company, spiritual company. And he said that after 30 years of being in his company, he could sum up all of his teachings in just eight advices or eight pieces of wisdom. So we looked at four of the pieces of wisdom last class. And we are at wisdom number five. And so he says, wal fa'idatul khamisa in ni rahaytun nas yazumu ba'adah wa yakhtab ba'adah hum ba'adah fa wajatu zalika minal hasadi fil mali wal jaha wal ay. Fa ta'am maltu fi koli hita'ala nahnu qasam na baina hum ain shatahum fil hayatu dunya fa alimtu and kismata kanat minal wahi ta'ala fil azali And so the fifth of the eight wisdoms is he says, I saw that people criticize and backbite one another. People put each other down and backbite one another. And I realized it was due to envy over wealth, honor and knowledge. So I reflected on Allah saying We have divided their livelihood in this worldly life. And so I realized this apportioning was from Allah in pre-eternity. And so I never envied anyone and was pleased with what Allah has apportioned. Let's go back, let's walk over. Because these wisdoms, they need to be unpacked. And you'll notice that he's following a pattern. First he says, I saw. So he's saying, I observed. Looking around, the first step of wisdom is to look around and to see the world around you and for what it is and what's happening and observe what's happening. These are all signs from Allah. And he's saying, I saw that people would criticize, put each other down. And you'll notice this in the world, no matter where you go, whether it's online or whether it's at work, between family members, people are putting each other down and they're back biting each other. which is to mention something about your brother or sister that they don't like, right? Even if it's true in their absence. So they're doing this, they're putting each other down. And then why are people putting each other down? Why is it that there's always this interpersonal aspect of conflict? And he's saying, and I realized it was because people were envying each other. Over what? Three things usually. The first is wealth, material gain. The second was honor, people wanting to feel more respected than the other person, right? So having more, being recognized and also knowledge, which is very strange because you would expect that knowledge would, you know, knowledge of Dean we're talking about. You would expect that knowledge of Dean would cause you not to do those things, to put each other down or various things like this. So why was it that people were backbiting criticizing each other because of knowledge? It's because perhaps one felt that the other had more knowledge. And so then he's saying, so then he observed, then I reflected. So first thing is to see and notice. Then to reflect on what? So you take that observation and you reflect on Allah's words. We divided their livelihood in this worldly life. Allah is saying we've given everyone everything that they have. We have already apportioned it. It's a fixed, let's say it's a fixed thing. And Allah has said, this person gets this much wealth. This person gets this much honor in their life. or prestige and position. And this person will get this much wealth and this person will get this much knowledge. So everything is divided by Allah's decree. And so if Allah has divided up all these things, then he said, I realized. So look at this pattern. I saw, I reflected then on Allah's words, taking what you see and bringing it back to Allah's words and then bringing the realization out of that. And what is that realization? That if everything that is being discussed and debated about and vied for, it's all apportioned from Allah, when pre-eternity, you had no way that you could have affected the division, the distribution of it. No way whatsoever. In fact, even once the means that you take to get that wealth has already been predestined from Azal. Azal is pre-eternity, not even since the creation of time and space, not even since people started to vie for things, not even since the means even existed. It was all divided. So what's the point of criticizing people for it and envying someone? Because what is envy? Hasid. Hasad is when you desire something that someone has in such a way you desire what someone else what Allah has willed for someone else in such a way that you want that blessing removed from that person and given to yourself that's basically the worst type of Hasad that you have of envy you see something that other people have So you want them to lose it so you can get it. But if you see something that someone else had, who gave it to them? Allah. And if you see something that you don't have, who didn't give it to you? Allah. So it's in essence, we are looking at things and we're saying why, not why does this person have more than me or why should they have more than me, why did Allah give this person more than they gave me? So in reality, envy is in essence a complaint to Allah and a showing of dissatisfaction and displeasure with his wisdom. So do you think, in other words, that this person shouldn't have that wealth that Allah gave them? That this person shouldn't have this much knowledge and Allah is happy with it? And Allah has been happy with it since before he created the heavens and the earth in pre-eternity? before anything was created. So you're vying really with Allah. So he's saying, I realize this is all apportioning from Allah. There's no need to feel envious. You have exactly what you can get. There's no way whether you envy, people think that by envying they're going to get more or the other person will lose a blessing that will never happen unless it's destined. And so then he said, so, and so this is the result, resultant after observation, reflection and realization. This is the resolve. And so I never envied anyone after that and was pleased with what Allah had portioned because it's difficult if a person is focused on wealth, right? Let's say a business person or something like that, or someone who's just vying in their trade, someone who's working to get the attention of other people like an influencer, a politician, or someone who's a student of knowledge and they see someone else more than them. They should never think, why can't I have this? They should know that the amount that I can expend in a halal way towards obtaining this, if it's permissible in itself, this is what Allah wants for me and what Allah does not want for me. I'm happy with that too. I remember once my teacher, Sheikh Ashraf Munib, in Jordan, I went to one of his classes when one of my daughters was a baby. And my wife had gone out somewhere. And so I was babysitting at home. It's funny, my wife says, if it's your own child, it's not called babysitting. That's true. So it's not called babysitting when it's your own child. So I took my daughter, my baby daughter at the time, she's big now, alhamdulillah. I took her to the class. And when I took her to the class, it's a traditional dars of fiqh. So my Ustad, my Sheikh looked at me and said, I'm very sorry, but we don't allow children in this class. So I didn't, I was new, I didn't have much adab, so I said, you know, I have no other place to take her. My wife is out and I have to babysit, I'll miss the class. And he said to me, something that stayed with me for a long time, and I realized this. He said, I'm sorry, this is, you have to do what you have to do, because is rizq, he said is rizq. Whatever you get, in other words, is what you are apportioned to get. If you are destined to miss this class because there's some thing that came up or you had some other duty to do, right? Never feel that it's something that you could have gotten had you not done this or that if you had no other way around it. Your child is your responsibility, for example, or something else, your parents need for something or you have some other duty or you have to work. or something like that you're tired you know got flat or whatever it is just remember when you miss out on something like that even religious it's risk it's something that you could not have gotten and so you say to Allah okay Allah I'm I'm pleased with that and that is part of knowledge as well I realize I learned more by having to miss the class than I than I would have had I stayed in the class and later Allah allowed me to to study that chapter somewhere else or maybe some other time, but the lesson learned there was greater. So there's no need to envy anyone if there's differences in this. Then he said the sixth wisdom, ... is like really like an interest or like you could say is like something beneficial. Beneficial point number six. In the right to nasa yu'adi ba'adu hum ba'adah li gharadin wasaba bin fata amaltu fikho lihita'ala in a shaytan adakum adu wum fatahidu hu adu from surah Fatir verse six. Wa alimtu anahulaya Jewsu adawat adawatu ahadin ghir shaytan so he's saying so he says I saw that people show enmity to each other they they hate each other they make enemies due to some interest or cause there's always some cause there's always some personal interest observation then he reflects on Allah saying surely Shaitaan is an enemy to you so take him for an enemy right so take him for an enemy and I realized it was impermissible to take anyone so I realized it was impermissible to take anyone other than Chaitan as an enemy. So I took him as an enemy and I left all others. And I left all others. This is about enmity. It's a wisdom. Because unfortunately, as we go through life, well, you know, sometimes we have people who we cross paths with who don't mix with us very well. or say we offend someone or for whatever reason it is, there's always something or another people always, you know, the first one was talking about envy because of certain things, but the other one is there are always issues coming up with people disagreeing about certain things, things in life that you just didn't agree on, right? And what he realizes is that There's always some cause or some interest, like I want this, you want this, this is my interest, this is your interest. So he looked at this, why is everybody making enemies with each other? How does it make sense that religious people can have enemies? You understand how worldly people have enemies, but how do religious people have enemies? And it does happen. People, you know, he's saying, I reflected on Allah saying, Shaitaan is your enemy or believer. So take him for an enemy, meaning understand that he is the real enemy of a believer and a mankind and treat the Shaitaan like that. If you know that you have an enemy, a person who knows that they are marked for a hit and that there's someone who contracted out to get them. or they know that they have an enemy lurking, they're always watching their back, right? They're always carrying protection. They're always locking their doors. Do we behave as though Shaitaan is our enemy? Do we take the precautions to make sure our enemy doesn't get to us? And so he's saying the reflection part of it and the action. So I took, he says, so I focused on Shaitaan as my enemy. and I never took anybody else as my enemy meaning whether they want to harm you or they don't want to harm you or whether they have it in for you or whatever it is there's no need to start looking at other human beings as people that you have to hate people that you have to try to get even with or avoid you let them do what they have to do and you do what you have to do just look out for your relationship with Allah against the shaitan. And everyone else cannot truly hurt you with Allah. Only the shaitan can, right? Of course, shaitan can come through your enemy, your worldly enemy. Sometimes people are shayateen, as we know. So that's all part of it. The point he was saying is that don't have enmity with one another. The seventh of the eight wisdom, eight wisdoms, he says, a sabia. Alfaden Sabia in niroitu kullahaden yasaabi jiddin wa yajtahidu be mubaaligatin thaalabil quote while ma'ash bihai thu yaqraubihi fi shubhatin wa haram wa ya zulunafsahu wa yan kos kadra kadrahu fata amaltu fi kolhita'ala wa ma min da wamaa min daa batin fil arudin illa ala Allah he rizkuha surahud ayah sadisah faalim tu anna rizqi ala Allah he ta'ala wa kal danmanahu fashtagal tu bi aibaadati he kathaatu al-tama'i am masi waahu very very beautiful he says I saw I observed I noticed that everyone who strives and goes to extremes, I saw that everyone strives and goes to extremes in search for their sustenance and livelihood. Everyone's working, everyone's hustling to the extent that they fall into doubtful or unlawful matters, humiliate themselves and diminish their worth. So before we move on, I'll just explain, inshallah, that he's noticing that everyone's just hustling and bustling. Everyone's moving all the time. And they're looking to get a buck. They're looking for their livelihood. They're looking for qut, just their daily bread. But what happens is that daily hustle, the rat race, the grind, what does that do? It makes them fall. They're trying to get more and more or they're at least trying to cover their bases and they fall into doubtful or unlawful matters. So what's happened is they try to do what's halal and then they feel that they're not getting their needs fulfilled, or not getting it fast enough, or they want to get more. So what happens, they go to the edge of the halal, which is called the doubtful, the shubuhat. And they're not sure if it's, is it halal, is it haram, it's kind of a gray area. So they get into this gray area, and once they're into this gray area, they become used to getting into the gray area. So they keep going into the gray area, those gray areas are the ones where when you ask the ulama about them, Is it halal or harm? They're like, Uh, it's, you know, we have to research more. We're not sure. Or really depends on your intention or, you know, it's better to avoid it. That's getting into a gray area. So what happens is they say, you know what, the halal just isn't giving me what I need right now. So I'm gonna go to the gray area. Then when they go to the gray area, they get so used to it that they eventually fall into the haram, the clear haram, because that gray area takes them right to the edge. And then they realize that, oh man, I really still need this and they're not fulfilled yet. I need this money. I'm in this rat race. I need to get this job. I need to get the deal. And something haram comes up and they take a step towards that and they fall into it. Very rarely do people go straight from the halal into the haram. They usually go through the gateway of the doubtful first. This is why you're supposed to even give the doubtful wide berth. And by doing so, Shaykh Hatim says, they humiliate themselves. This person who was known for earning halal and working in halal and having a religious, pious, righteous livelihood, all of a sudden they humiliate themselves. They start dealing in shady things. Who do they humiliate themselves in front of? Not people, in front of Allah, in front of Allah. And then what happens? They diminish their worth. The worth in front of who? In the eyes of the people? No. No. They diminished their worth in the eyes of Allah. Because why? They were taking from halal sustenance, then they went to haram sustenance. So their closeness with Allah was affected by that. Their worth, their standing with Allah, they compromised for their livelihoods. And so he says, and I reflected on Allah saying, There is no creature on earth except that its sustenance is upon Allah. So Allah is saying there's not even an ant or a bee or a microbe or a whale or a human being except that what it's supposed to get is completely Allah's job to get it to them completely. And I realized that my provision rests on Allah ta'ala he's saying so I realized I'm one of those creatures and Allah has guaranteed it that that provision and so I busied myself in worship to him and I cut myself off of desires for anything besides him because at the end of the day the reason why you get busy in dunya or in other things because we have a desire for those things So he realized if my risk is guaranteed for me, then why am I busting myself just to get what I'm supposed to get? You put in your fair effort, your fair share, but why am I worrying about it? See, this is the whole problem. It's nothing wrong with working hard. Are we balancing the things that Allah wants from us? That's how you know, that's the limit of working hard. And how do we know when our working hard goes into goes overboard when we start to worry and fret over it so you do your you work hard and you do you put together you put your best effort forward you whatever you're selling or whatever you're doing and yet you stop short where it comes time to cross your obligations with Allah or his commands and then you also never allow yourself to start worrying about it And this is why he's realized that he cut off his desires for everything else. Because as long as he desired to get something out of the rat race, he couldn't busy himself truly in worship to Allah. This is what he realized. And the next, and the final of the eight wisdoms. ... Wa dila dana nira darahim Wa adahum ila al mal wal mulk Wa adahum ila hirfa was Sana'a Wa adahum ila makhluqin Mithla Mithlihi Fata'am mal tufin kolihi ta'ala Wa mai ya tawakkal ala Allahi fahua hasbuh In Allahaba lihu amri Qada ja'ala Allahu likuli shayin Qada raw Fata wakkal too SubhanAllah. So the last of the eight wisdoms, he says, I saw that everyone relies on something created. Everyone is depending on some created thing and some on gold and silver coins and others on wealth and owning things, others on profession and production and some on created beings like themselves. So what does this mean? He's saying everybody's depending on something else. What is it though? What is that created thing that you're depending on? Is it your money? Is it other things that you own, your property, your rental properties, your investments, your Bitcoin? Is it something like a profession that you're relying on, your position, the production of your factory, your intelligence? Or is it your degree? Is it your research? Is it your social standing? Or are you relying on some created being like yourself? Is it this person must, this person is my benefactor or my parents provide for me or my husband or my wife or my child will provide and it's my boss who pays me. So everyone's relying on someone or something that is created. Is that reflected on Allah saying, And whoever relies on Allah, then he is their sufficiency. Surely Allah reaches his objective. Allah has made for every single thing an apportioned measure. Right? Allah, so Allah is saying, whoever relies on him, he will make it, he will be their sufficiency. Not so when we think that our job is what supports us, My company has been so good to me. My company is what keeps us in this house, what makes us eat. Then sometimes we learn when that company goes away, when that job goes away, now who's sustaining you? Now who's supporting you? Allah. And so when we put our Tawakkul in Allah, then He, not He creates your sufficiency, He becomes your sufficiency, He Himself. is enough for you and when Allah is enough for you then everything else that you need he will give it to you in the proportion that you need why because Allah will reach his objective that he wills for you and has made every single thing in an apportioned measure I have a friend of mine who taught me this CD Muhammad Robert Heft alhamdulillah dear friend may Allah bless him And he said, whenever I was abroad on a trip and I was running out of money, I didn't know where money was going to come from. He said, I would give away my money. I would give away the rest of my money and depend on Allah. And from nowhere, money would always come and get me out of my travels, get me through my travels back home. Just imagine that he would I mean, he's not probably not listening so I can say this about him, that you have a little bit of money left in a foreign country. That's the last place you want to be without money, in a place that's not your home. And then in a strange way, relationship with Allah, in a strange way that he personally sees things, I'm not saying everybody has to do this, But in his strange way of Tawakkul, he was saying, I just did this personal experiment that works each time for him, which I just gave away everything and then relied on Allah and Allah would always bring him through it. Allahu Akbar. Many people report this, that when they were struggling and hustling in the grind, life was tough. It was day-to-day, month to month, paycheck to paycheck between them in the street and then they just gave it up to Allah. It doesn't mean you leave your job. No, it's something internal. You just start trusting Allah. You take a step back, you put Allah as your provider and everything goes much easier. Everything seems to go much easier. Even if it's not necessarily doesn't mean that your salary is gonna double. What it means is that Allah will take care of things in such a way that you don't even stress about it or realize that you have to have any anxiety over it. right because Allah is taking care of everything so what does he say results so I put my trust in Allah for he is my sufficiency and what an excellent trustee is he and those are the eight wisdoms so just to summarize right the first wisdom dealt with love for good deeds and the grave who do you really love what's really beloved to you make it good deeds and curtailing desires of the self curtailing desires of the self and the third one was spending worldly gain for Allah whatever money you have that's excess we try to spend it for Allah's sake and finding nobility in taqwa finding everyone's competing for nobility find it in taqwa and contentment without envy and no enmity except with shaitan don't take any enemies And striving for worship and not striving for the world. Finally trusting and relying on Allah wholly and alone. These are the eight wisdoms. When you really look at them, when you review them, there's so much in this that his teacher said, when he heard this, ... May Allah give you divinely gifted ability. oh my student hat him he says I have looked I have certainly looked inside the Torah and the gospel and the the Psalms of Daud of David and the Quran the Furan and I have found In these, that these four holy books, these four sacred scriptures, they revolve around these eight points that you mentioned. It can be summarized, the wisdom of the teachings can be summarized around these eight points that you have mentioned. And so whoever acts on these eight points that you mentioned, then he has been acting on all four of these divinely revealed scriptures. Of course, the only one that's preserved out of them is the Quran, and they do say that there is a, They do discourage people without need to read in previous scriptures because sometimes people don't know what's true of them, what's not true of them. We don't know actually, they've been altered except for the Quran of course. But you know, as a scholar, and as a spiritual guide, he has looked through them with his obviously his ilman, his understanding, his insight and his authority. And just imagine you have, there's been 30 year relationship a 30 relationship between spiritual guide and student and he summarized it in eight sentence, in eight statements. And these eight wisdoms, even his own Sheikh says, not only have you summarized everything I taught you, you summarized the Quran and three other previous revelations through these wisdoms. Because if you really look in those eight wisdoms, it has all of the ingredients for servitude to Allah . all of the ingredients of what it means to be a servant of Allah and the point of revelation is to recognize our servitude to Allah who Allah is and who we are who Allah really is and who we really are because once that is understood we understand the purpose of our existence the purpose of our creation and that is the purpose of our of our of our creation itself is to realize that with Allah and then he continues now Then in the next section, Imam Ghazali says, Ayu halwalad Qad alimtam in Hatain al-Hakayatain, Anna kala tahtadu ila takhthir al-An wal-An ubayyunu la kamaya jibu al-Asalika sabi al-Haqq O beloved son or dear child, you have known now from these two stories that we have just said, what two stories? The story of Shaqi Kulbalkhi and Hatim al-Assam And before that, the story of Shibley that we mentioned last class that you do not need to gather to keep gathering a whole bunch of knowledge. You don't need to keep proliferating your knowledge as long as you know these basic things. And now I will tell you what is obligatory upon you in for a spiritual traveler on the path of truth. So it's interesting because everything he said now He's saying this is the stuff that everyone needs to know. He's saying these are the things that everyone should know in their relationship with Allah. So where is the spirituality? He's saying now, that is spirituality, but now we'll talk about the path to Allah itself, the path to reaching Allah. He says, now we will tell you what is not Wajib upon the Talib not the student the Salik the Talib is the one who seeks knowledge the Salik is the one who is traversing a path to Allah . So in one sense not from not knowledge of the books but it's knowledge of the spiritual states to be with Allah and his good pleasure that encompasses everything below it and so he says continuing on Anhu yam bahil saliki min shaykhin, murshidin, murabbin liakhrujal akhlaq, asu, asu, minhu, bitar biyati, bitar biyati and see so he's saying and know that it is befitting or it is only fitting for a spiritual traveler to have a a Sheikh a a spiritual guide who is who will someone who will nurture them some who will nurture them and take them from base and disappointing and low character traits through his gradual instruction and put in the place of those traits a beautiful beautiful character traits right so what did they say a Sheikh what did they mean by Sheikh first of all in these you know as we know the meaning of Sheikh actually means old man Right? So as they said, somebody, She called me a sheikh, and I'm not a sheikh. A sheikh is someone who crawls and hobbles, you know? So the person said like, You hark, you call me a sheikh. Meaning, sheikh originally in Arabic means old man. But as they say, a sheikh in literal terms, just someone who has been aged by time. Whereas a sheikh in learning or a sheikh in this context is someone who has been aged by knowledge or aged by the knowledge of Allah . So in this sense, why did they call a learned person that? You know, we're talking about like when Pammans really deserves that title, not the way that they throw it around today, you know, anybody with a beard, sheikh, you know, young person teaching sheikh, no, no, no. that's not for that's not what the term originally is used for in the Islamic context it's not used like that and so it is a person a Sheikh in this field it is a human being who has perfected who has perfected in the knowledges of the Sharia and the knowledges of spiritual uh traveling and the knowledges of spiritual realities subtleties and realities and who has gone up to the level, reached the point where they are perfected in all of these, the application and realization in all of these different fields, these three levels, and has also been cleansed and perfected from the calamities of the soul, the things that make one's soul distant from Allah and its diseases. and it's sicknesses and by knowing by knowing and knowing how to overcome them and to heal from them and then he says the Murabbi right and he says so seeking a sheikh like this in order to reach Allah this is this is seeking Allah himself So on the path to seeking Allah, you need to seek a means to Allah, Imam Ghazali is saying, a means to guide you there and finding such a person to take you there is part of seeking Allah himself. So people shouldn't think that in order to seek Allah, I have to find this person, then I'll seek Allah. Finding such a person, you're seeking Allah through finding that person because this person will take you or show you the way to Allah if they have traveled it themselves, which is what a true Sheikh would do. and walk with you on the path in order to guide you in those different ways. So what is the role of a spiritual guide? Number one is to extract bad character traits, right? So, and this happens not overnight and it's not about, here's a book, read the translation and you should be, you know, come back next week without these qualities, that doesn't work like that. It's over a year, it's days and nights of slipping and falling, sometimes being embarrassed, being absolutely heartbroken as to one's condition and the way that one is. It's about trying again and again. Sometimes it's about being scolded, sometimes about being embarrassed and humiliated. But at all costs, not accepting a bad character trait in one and working tooth and nail to get that out because part of the things that stand between us and reaching Allah is our bad akhlaq our bad character traits it's the aspect of the nafs that is antithetical to someone who knows Allah and so when we see a trait within us as long as we are working on it and as long as we don't accept it we are on that path to Allah the minute we say you know I'm a pretty rude guy let's say It's not good, but that's one, I accept that part of myself. Let me work on the other parts. That person is not a spiritual traveler in the real sense because they've become satisfied with an aspect of themselves that Allah is not happy with. And so someone reaching Allah will want to take out anything Allah doesn't like. When you're in love with someone, truly, you'll try to get rid of anything that they don't like. Why to please your beloved, to make that beloved person happy around you. And so if your breath smells and your beloved complains of it, you're gonna make sure, try your best at least, at least intend that your breath doesn't smell that way again, for example, because you know that it prevents you from coming close to your beloved. So why would you want to do that, for example? And then what happens, so taking away your bad qualities to extract the bad characters and to replace them with good traits. The reason is because, you know, human beings are not just not just empty vessels. There's no way you cannot have a trait. We all have traits. We can't just be like we can't just be formless and characterless and undifferentiated from each other. We all have personalities. We all have likes and dislikes. We all have quirks, personality, you know, traits. So if you don't have good traits, It necessarily bad traits will grow. If you don't plant flowers in the garden, weeds will grow. Weeds will grow. But how can you plant flowers when there are so many weeds? So the Murabbi, they describe, is like a gardener, right? This is the next line, SubhanAllah. He says, And the meaning of tarbiya, which is gradual instruction. So the next thing is to do tarbiya, which is gradual instructive nurturing, or gradual nurturing instruction, I should say. Gradual nurturing instruction. So that person, the real role of the spiritual guide is to do that tarbiya. What does Talbiya mean? It means to take, you know, come from the word Rab. Rab, Lord, is someone who takes you from a lower degree of perfection in stages to a higher degree of perfection. That's the meaning Rab. Of Rab. Rabbatulbayt, the housewife is often called Rabbatulbayt. It's not a belittling term. It's a term of great honor. Someone who is taking people in the house, in that family, from a lower state of perfection to a higher state of perfection. That's what they call Rabbatulbayt, subhanAllah. So this is the thing that tarbiya does. It's a gradual thing. It's not something that happens overnight. You just implant it or you take an evening like a double weekend intensive and Great, we're done. Here's what I have to say. No, it's gradual and it's instructive and it's nurturing. And so he's saying, Imam Ghazali is saying, and the meaning of tarbiya, it resembles the action of a farmer who first uproots the thorns and takes out all of the foreign weeds and plants that have grown in the field so that he pulls them all out, then he has an empty field. what are you gonna do in that empty field if you don't plant the right thing the weeds will come back then he plants the right the right things which is the good character traits and so the spiritual guide when they take out your character traits that are bad by Allah's leave and help you to to recognize them they're also imparting good character traits either by verbally or by their state by observing them right by observing them to in order to complete and perfect the vegetation of that spiritual aspirant. He's saying because Allah sent to his servants a mighty messenger in order to guide them to his path And so when that mighty messenger left this world, left this world, then he left behind the successors, the Khulafa, not just literally the Khulafa for Khulafa but Sahaba and those people in their stead who he taught. And these successors he put in his place so that they could guide the rest of creation, all of humanity to Allah in order to achieve the same meaning that we are talking about. And so there is no other choice for the spiritual aspirant except to have a sheikh. a spiritual guide who will nurture and instruct him and guide him or her to the path of Allah so the the fourth thing is to guide to the way of Allah to Allah that's the whole point it's not just about feeling good spirituality you know connecting with you know nature or the environment or getting good character traits it is tarbiyah to guide to the way of Allah to reach Allah himself to reach Allah himself and he says then he and he continues and and and and he said now wait a second this um I think there's a drop in one of the texts here in the Arabic of the text sometimes you have different manuscripts that may contain slightly different okay let's keep going inshallah it's okay then he says in the next section. He says, And oh dear child, the condition of a sheikh that is fit to be a deputy to the messenger of Allah in guiding people to Allah is that he should be an . He should be, this doesn't literally mean scholar, it means someone who has scholarly knowledge Right? An aalim could be a scholar, most likely it's a scholar, but it's a knowledgeable person. Not that every aalim is fit to be a spiritual guide, but every spiritual guide must be an aalim. What does an aalim mean? Someone who has knowledge of the deen and acts on what he knows or she knows. And so it doesn't mean that the person graduated from Sharia College or Dar alum or something like that, or madrasa. It means that the person has that knowledge that you would expect to gain in those realms of spiritual, you know, sacred knowledge, but they act upon it and they apply it. So they're an aalim who does amal on their own, but not that every single aalim. So in case you think, oh, okay, this person is an aalim, so they must be a spiritual guy too. No, many times people make this mistake. If you're teaching a class, people will come and say, you know, to a teacher, Can you also be my spiritual guide? And if that person is honest, they should say, No, no. Teaching something or being a scholar does not mean that they're fit to be a spiritual guide. This is something that Imam Ghazali is telling right away that not every 'alim is a spiritual guide or even fit to be a spiritual guide. Why? Because it goes beyond the learned knowledge. It goes to traversing, someone who has traversed the path of Allah. Why? And I will tell you some of the signs of being a Shaykh, a spiritual guide, to be fit to be one on this path in a general way, so that not anyone. So why am I going to outline? what it takes to be a spiritual guide so that not just anyone and everyone can claim that they are a spiritual guide. This is why he's saying this. Lest they say, Imam Ghazali said that he must be an alim, a spiritual guide must be an alim. So lest every alim start saying they're a spiritual guide or you start thinking that, I will tell you what a spiritual guide must really be like so that you can differentiate. The fifth thing in the role of a spiritual guide is that he must be or she must be an alem, and not every alem, but not every alem is a spiritual guide. Now, the next section and the final section is a true spiritual guide. What is that person? Imam Ghazali is saying, now it's interesting to note this, right, because there's often this debate in like, especially in modern circles, Do you need to have a sheikh? Do you need to take a tariqa? Do you need those are all kind of questions that float around. Imam Ghazali here is not saying you need to follow one specific way or one specific tradition. What he's saying is that you need to follow someone who has gone down that path themselves and is qualified to take you, take someone else down that path. That's what he's saying. So very clearly, even though Imam Ghazali did not leave behind any, as far as I know, a lot of his best, there's no like Ghazali in order or Tariqah, he didn't leave necessarily behind a relationship of student teacher, student teacher explicitly, but he's saying that he's clearly a proponent of this idea. So he's saying this idea now, does this mean that you cannot pursue spirituality if you don't have a shaykh? No, he's not saying this. So let's just be very, very clear about this. He's not saying that you cannot at all. What they're saying is that this is the way that most people have to do this because it's very difficult to take out your faults or even recognize them if you don't have someone else helping you do it. In the same way that very few people make it to Olympics without a coach. Very, very rarely. For example, can you reach the Olympics and win a gold medal or something like that? And who's your coach? I don't have a coach. I just do it on my own. Really? Nobody taught you the techniques, nobody taught you how to improve, nobody timed you, nobody pushed you forward, nobody cheered you on, nothing. If we can understand this in the worldly sense, Same thing with someone who gets a designation, like if you met somebody who's a doctor, a very, very skilled surgeon, like, Where did you learn surgery from? And they say, Yeah, I just read the books and I just tried it, I was pretty good. You say, Well, somebody has a PhD. And they say, Well, where'd you get your PhD? Who's your advisor, who's your supervisor, who are your professors? I say, I just, like right off the blue, I just wrote something and I got my PhD. It's very unlikely. You may have the rare genius who's able to do that in the same way that they talk about this. The spiritual scholars say it's not impossible for Allah and it hasn't been and has occurred where someone just their spirituality, Allah just opens their heart in an instant and they go, they traverse the entire length of the path, the entire length of the path because Allah wants to show that he can do what he wants and he can guide who he wants in his awliya or his prerogative, not ours. But the way that most people have to do it, is they have to go through this idea of taking from a teacher, right? This idea, and it's nothing but a continuation of how the Sahaba took from the Prophet different types of knowledges. So he says, ... He says, The condition... Where were we? ... It is that person, a worship is that person. who turns away from love of the world and love of rank so number of first things first turns away from love of this world and love of rank right because those are the two things which turn a person astray this is what two the things that make people and love of dunya they say that love of this world is the fountainhead of every single sin and fault you can think of Shaitaan, what did he do? He had envy for Adam . He had pride. Why? Because it's recognition. I'm in this rank, you're in this rank. It's something that deals with the world. He didn't say, who am I with Allah and who are you with Allah? I'm better than him. So it's a comparison. So the love for the world and love for rank, it is necessary that he turns away from these things. So anytime you see someone claiming to be a spiritual guide, yet they are vying in reputation or honor with the next person beside, with the other spiritual guide next door to the next one, the next masjid, you know there's something fishy going on. The other thing is we learn these things as well to help us recognize, not to condemn someone else, but to help us say, this is the person I want to be my teacher, right? I asked, I once asked, how does one know who to take as their spiritual guide? And the answer that I received that benefited me later on, Alhamdulillah, by Allah's grace, is the person who reminds you most of the Prophet . Because a true spiritual guide will always remind you of Rasulullah , because they walk on that path. And someone who walks on a path as someone else, you'll notice the similarities. Even people in sports who train with each other, you notice their moves are very similar to their teachers. you notice that a person an academic they have certain influences you can trace them right down in their writings their ideas a genealogy of ideas in the same way this genealogy of spiritual states makes a person see their their way that they are with Allah trace it all the way back to the Prophet and feel that if I had to be with the Prophet today if I had to think who is the most like them today that the Rasul today I think it would be this person. And that's the bet. So that's a very good bet. A very good way of determining if you can't measure everything else. Okay, then it goes on his and so turns away from love. of this world and love of rank. Number two, he has been under the guidance and that person themselves has been under the guidance of an insightful master. So not someone who's self-taught. The autodidact in spirituality is a big no-no, a big no-no. That's a sign. When you ask someone, well, who's your teacher? Where did you learn this stuff from? You're speaking about nice things, you're reading these texts, where are you getting all this from? And it's like, oh, you know, just over the years I've taught myself and been reading, you know, I've got a bunch of books and that's a problematic, that's like a sign that, so this person had to have followed their own teacher and the sign of someone who often, who's qualified to teach, you'll notice this, about the spiritual guides, even the spiritual masters in our time, you know, they're always quoting their own teachers. They're always saying, my sheikh, my sheikh, my sheikh, in the context when they're teaching spirituality. they're not they're always bringing it back because that's who they kept company with so they're always they're not saying me me me me me they're always saying our sheikh used to say my sheikh used to say my guide used to say my master used to say and then they'll even go back to my teacher used to say that his teacher said this so there's a there's a there's a chain of quotations the greatest word they're using is not me and I it's usually my sheikh and his sheikh and his teacher and so and number three is an insightful master whose master, whose own master is connected by chain of tutelage back to the message of Allah . So there has to be that chain, just like in Hadith. There has to be a chain of narration. Where did you hear this from? Okay, you heard it from so-and-so, who goes back to so-and-so, Anfulan, Anfulan goes back to Imam al-Bukhari. And Imam al-Bukhari's chain is right there, goes all the way back to Rasulullah . So we say this Hadith is a true Hadith. when we know this is the chain. Now, when we look at the chain of spiritual tutelage, meaning master and disciple going all the way back, what is being transferred? This is what people also get wrong. It's not a body of knowledge like, here's a book. This is what my teacher learned from me. Again, people get this wrong because they'll be like, wait a second. So where's the book that your teacher gave you? No, no, no, no. It's the spiritual state that is passed on from master to disciple, to their disciple, to their disciple, to their disciple, it's the hal. So there had to have been some type of transfer of hal between those two, and that's how you get this idea of the unbroken chain going back to the Prophet . So anybody who says, this person, even if it was 700 years ago, a thousand years ago, they have a chain all the way back to this figure, but where did they get it from? oh they just converted to Islam and you know got this epiphany and all of a sudden weren't enlightened we say no sorry or this person let's say became Muslim but he came from a very spiritual tradition before and so when he was Muslim he was just able to say no this is not they might be spiritual in themselves they might be on the right path for themselves but we don't take that person as a spiritual guide because of a necessity what you're doing when you're being told this is the path to Allah must go back to some authority from Rasulullah and number the next thing is he says right and is adept at self-discipline of the training lower self in eating drinking speech and sleep so what it means is this type of person is not the type of person that is greedy in their eating and gluttonous and in their drink so the focus is not where to eat and where to drink and you'll never whenever you see a spiritual master you'll always notice that they don't even seem desirous of food and drink to them whether they're eating you know whether they're eating plain bread or whether they're eating delicious food it doesn't make a difference to them it doesn't make a difference to them whatever whatever is on the menu no problem but they do One thing you notice is that they do prefer the food of pious people, even if it's simple, over the food of, let's say, a restaurant or the food of some big banquet. That's not what they're concerned with, but it's the state of the person of who's making their food. That's what they value. So what we're talking about here is not that they don't eat or not that they don't eat good things or that they don't have healthy food. No one says that they just have to eat dried stale bread every day, but it's that they have trained their nafs on how to reduce it to what they need and including their speech. So they are not of those who you see online on debates online or when somebody says something against them, they're making a video online to go on and on defending their enoughs. and saying why this other person is bad and why I'm really right. They don't have this idea of being verbose and also the lack of less sleep. Why? Because they would rather use the time of the night to be with Allah than to be getting an excess amount of sleep. That doesn't mean that they don't get their rest. it means that they don't they're not lazy right they're not lazy well and they are known and they are given to and they are given to much prayer charity and fasting and those three why because first of all the prayer as it is it is said it is the prayer combines all the different types of worship physical worship right physical worship and even even financial worship subhanAllah even worship of the heart in the form of in the form of tahara purity purification and covering the awra turning to the qibla there's so many different things that you do to prepare for prayer or that you give up while you're praying that it's an all-encompassing type of worship this is why it is the hallmark of a spiritual guide that they love being in prayer to Allah . They don't skimp on their prayer. And you'll notice that these are not the types of people that are in and out of the prayer quickly, skipping their sunnahs. You know, the prayer is hasty and rushed, , get up and go. No, these are people for whom the prayer is a major event. You can tell their lives revolve around the prayer. They're waiting to get into communion with Allah. and everything else is like an off time. Whereas we do sometimes the opposite. Our lives are going on, we get the prayer out of the way and go back to our lives. It's opposite with them. They live for their prayer and everything else to get out of the way to get back into the prayer and charity. So they do not hold what they have. They may get many gifts, they give them away. And the commentator says, The best of charity is that which is given from the most beloved wealth of a person, right? Allah says, that you will not attain righteousness until you spend of that which you love. And this is what they do. And fasting, right? And fasting. And he says, Waqana bimutabiti shaykh al-basir ja'ilan mahasin al-Akhlaq lahu seera and Number 6, through his master, good traits have become his way of life. It's become a seed off for him. So it's not just like you, it's just sometimes you see these traits, it's just become a way of life. And what are those traits? And then he lists them and we'll just list them for today. We're not going to comment on them because Imam Ghazali just quickly lists them because he's trying to give us an idea. So he says, Ka what? Like as what? Ka sabr, wa shukr, wa tawakkul, wa yaqeen, wa sakhawa, wa qana'a, wa tuma'nina to nafs, wa? Wa ilm, wa hilm, wa tawadu, wa sidq, wa haya, wa wafa, wa wakar, wa sukoon, wa ta'anni, wa amthalu, wa amthaliha. And then he says, Imam Ghazali then starts to list the traits of a true guide. Through his own master, good traits have become his way of life, such as patience and gratitude, sabr and shukr, two wings of a bird that must be balanced and trust in Allah and certainty by being realized, not certainty as in discursive proof, so they have all the proofs of God. That's not the type of certainty that the spiritual master has. It's certainty that comes from the heart because they are realized in the spiritual path and they know a lot experientially this is the type of certainty that they know not the certainty of the books and of the proofs which is important but it's a higher certainty it's an experience and generosity and contentment tranquility of soul and clemency they're forgiving they let things go that other people do to them and they don't have a sense of they don't have a sense of being disturbed you don't see them disturbed by other people and they have humility and learning. So they have knowledge, but the knowledge doesn't make them arrogant. It makes them more humble and they are truthful. They're always truthful and modesty and loyalty and dignity and calm and deliberateness. So they carry themselves in such a way that they don't put themselves down or they're not erratic in their behavior. a person like this is an ocean of tranquility and being around them makes you feel calm too being around them makes you feel like your problems are not as bad as they are as you think they are so they call you towards Allah and deliberateness when they do things they don't do things in a reactionary manner they do things by thinking about them and they do things with as if they've considered it because they are guided by Allah and many more and so to close he says ... ... and he's saying so in conclusion with all of these traits he is a light right in conclusion when we looked at all of these different traits right what what is this person after all of these things that he's listed and he lists many of these things. Let's go to the slide. And it is that he is a light from the lights of the prophet who is fit to be followed. But the existence of someone like this is rare and scarcer than red sulfur, right? So, so subhanAllah, he and I will end the section with that. He continues. But we'll end it with that. He's saying that basically this person to summarize, he's a light from the lights of the Prophet . Everywhere he goes, what does light do? Light expels darkness and it lets you see things the way they are. When a room is dark and you turn on the lights, you see things the way they are. This is what a true spiritual guide does, shows you reality about who you are, what the world is and who Allah is. But he's saying that such a person is more rare than red sulfur, which was a term that they used, Khimrit al-Ahmar in the olden days. Basically, it's like a compound that doesn't have a real kind of a literal existence, but it's something that is almost unattainable. It doesn't mean it's impossible. So people shouldn't say that such people do not exist. Rather, it's not something that you find around every corner and so you have to look for it and in reality it is something that we have to beg Allah for and only if Allah has apportioned this for us do we find it so we beg Allah and ask Allah to find to show us the way and when we find the way we make shukr for it and act like we are thankful for it by following that person who Allah sends for us if we decide if Allah decides that that's the path that he wants us to take Charlotte will take any questions if there are any questions.
