Mismillah Rahman Rahim, Alhamdulillahi Rabbin Alameen, Wa Sallallahu Ala Saidam Muhammad Wa Ali Wa Sahbi Yajmaeen, Subhanakala Ailma Lana illa ma al lamtana, Inna Kantal Alimul Hakeem, Allahumma Alimna Mayan Fauna, Wan Fauna, Bimatu Alimuna Wizdamin Fadlika Alima, Inna Ka'ala Kuli Shayin Qadir, Rubbish Rahli Sadri, Silli Amri Wahlu Akadatamilli, Sani Yaf Kahukuli, Wa Sallallahu Allah Saida Muhammad Wa Ali Wa Sahbi Yajma Assalamu alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa rakatuh. Alhamdulillah, thanks for your patience, alhamdulillah. As you know, this is my first time, alhamdulillah, here at Seekers. It's a big blessing from Allah, something I'm very thankful for, that alhamdulillah, after many years, after many years alhamdulillah I can come back here and I'm very thankful and grateful firstly to Sheikh Faraz and to Omar alhamdulillah for providing that framework and that structure a beautiful place where we can sit down to exchange points of knowledge reflect on this deen that Allah has blessed us with and to receive guidances from the scholars of the past and to live our tradition alhamdulillah that Allah has blessed us with coming down straight connected to the prophet alhamdulillah and it also gives me it's also very you know something I make shukr to for Allah thank Allah for the fact that this is the first class that I'll be facilitating here at seekers guidance here in Canada and of course for those of us who are for those of you are online alhamdulillah and the I think that the book that we are beginning with, which is Imam al-Ghazali's Ayyu al-Walad, his letter to his disciple is for me, it wasn't planned to be this way, that this would be the first class from my side. But I think this is the biggest, this is a big blessing from Allah Subhanahu ta'ala. And I take it that this book, going through this book and exploring this with each other together for the, on these Tuesday nights, is a message for me first. You know, nobody, you know, you can teach Fiqh, you can teach Aqidah, you can teach things like this, but you know, you don't really teach Imam al-Ghazali's works. You benefit from, you know, at least nobody like me can, I don't do that. We benefit from it. So when Imam al-Ghazali addresses this letter, Ayuh al-Walad, like literally what it means, that could be, it could mean a boy or like a small child. because what it could be either male or female it's just general could be child children um some translate it as dear beloved son some will say oh son just simply oh youth as well so really you know it's I feel that Imam Al Ghazali is speaking to me and to all of us here directly alhamdulillah so before we begin reading the text it's a short text um Imam Al Ghazali will speak a little bit about him Because as you know, and you've probably heard, it's a letter of advice from Imam Al-Ghazali to one of his senior students. That student is nameless. We don't find out in the book itself who that student was. It's now between Allah and his infinite knowledge and Imam Al-Ghazali and his dear student. But it behooves us to find out a little bit more about Imam al-Ghazali before we get going into his text. Because when you get advice from someone, getting anonymous advice or advice from someone you don't know, it's not the same as getting advice from someone you know. And when I mean know, we all know the name Imam al-Ghazali. He doesn't need any introduction. He was one of the greatest scholars of Islam, but when we look a bit more into his life and we reflect on what he went through, to bring this knowledge to us. And the standing that he had in the eyes of the ulema and the eyes of the ummah for all of these centuries and generations, it makes us, I guess, cast a deeper glance within ourselves. And it helps us to recognize that these words of advice are not just coming from any teacher, they're coming from a scholar of scholars, one of the greatest scholars that does Ummah has seen. So Alhamdulillah, the first thing is to speak about who Imam Al-Ghazali was . He was Abu Hamid, Muhammad, Ibn Muhammad, Ibn Muhammad, Ibn Ahmed, Al-Ghazali, Al-Shafi'i, Al-Ashari, Al-Tusi, and Abu Hamid Al-Ghazali his name was Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Muhammad and some say it goes even as far back as seven generations and this is from obviously nobody names their sons Muhammad in you know seven generations successive generations multiple generations except that they have a great love so for the one who bore that name initially SAW and in this alone there's a great secret in this alone there is a great lesson that The path that we follow is that of the prophet . And even his kunya is hamid. It is a version of coming from that trilateral root. The prophet said the best of names are those which the ones that start with abd so and so or that have that involve that trilateral root to mean the one who praises Allah , the one who's the most praiseworthy. Imam al-Ghazali was born in Thus, which is now in modern day Iran, in Persia. And then he spent time in Nishapur. And he was a great Shafi jurist. We know that he began to study of Fiqh. He was born in the year 450 after Hijra, which is approximately a thousand years ago, just a little bit less than a thousand years ago, or 1058 AD. and within his he lived for 55 years and in that 55 year period he achieved what generations of other scholars were not given tawfik to achieve in the same way he was of Persian descent so he was not of Arab stock he was of Persian descent most of his books were written that survive today come to us in the Arabic language but some also come to us in Persian in Farsi And this book, Ayu al-Walad, which is something that I didn't know before, is that this book was initially written as a letter in Farsi, in Persian, to his student, originally called Ay-Farzand, which literally means Oh Sun. So it was initially written because when someone writes, especially in this tradition of Islamic knowledge, if you're not an Arab and you're speaking formally, in a scholarly context, you may write in Arabic, such as when we write to our teachers who also speak English or another language. If you're speaking formally, then you may write in Arabic or speak in Arabic. But when you're speaking on a level of intimacy and closeness, then you usually go back to your native language. And so it shows us that the letter itself was You know, we kind of get to stand on the shoulders of giants and get a peek into how scholars would advise each other. We know how we get advice from, for example, our parents or our mentors and our teachers, but how does one of the greatest scholars of the Ummah advise one of his senior students who's also, if he was around today, that student would probably be more knowledgeable than most scholars around today because the level of scholarship in that time was very, very high. So Imam al-Ghazali initially began to study fiqh in his locality, in Tus and Nisapur, and he quickly learned all of the disciplines of his time, and he studied under the great Imam al-Juwayni, who is also known as Imam al-Haramain, and he became one of his most prominent students. And even in the time of his teacher, he became someone that his teacher would praise and commend. And he mastered the sciences of Fiqh, of Usul al-Fiqh, of Mantiq. He's also well known in Aqida and Kalam, in philosophy. And this is all before he kind of went into his phase of writing the Ikhya. He was considered a master in all of the fields that he touched. And if you look at his a bibliography of his of his works of all of his the works that he wrote he has an outstanding book in almost every single field that he touched subhanAllah and he was also not only a master of sciences in within our tradition but he was a master of refuting heresies because it was a time when many you know Islamic knowledge was vibrant in this time very very vibrant But when Islamic knowledge is vibrant and there's a culture of education and learning, there are also many different ideas that start coming into the ummah from other influences from different civilizations or even different intellectual trends that crop up. And from time to time, actually in all times, there is a need for ulama to address those ideas that deviate from the norm. that become either sectarian or that become extreme or that become misguided off of the path of Ahl-Sunnawal-Juma'ah. And so he was not only the most adept in the sciences of our tradition, but he would be able to master the opinions and the polemics of the other side of the people that he would debate. and through this overcome their falsehoods and their ideologies. And for this reason, as he rose in prominence, he became known as Hujatul Islam, the proof of Islam, because he was the one who established the proofs for why this path was the true path. And so they gave him this moniker of being a proof of Islam in himself because he established those proofs. And so as he began to rise in his prominence, he was invited by Nizam al-Mulk, who was the vizier of the Khalifa of the time, to Baghdad, which was the seat of learning in Iraq, and he went from being the Imam of Khurasan, of his area, and when he came to Iraq, which was the center of learning of its time, he became the Imam of Iraq, and he came to the Nizamiya Madrasa, which was one of the most challenging posts, a high professorial post, the absolute bastion of Islamic knowledge of his time. And it was a difficult and a very prominent post as well. And there his students were senior scholars in their own right. And so he came there and this is at the age of 41 is when he went there so he was very young when he achieved these you know for example when you you know in our for example in academia here you do have people who are young and and achieve prominence but many times it comes after decades and decades of a career you know a decades of a career and then you reach a certain height you know and by the time he was 40 41 he was already in in in one of the highest posts of the Muslim world and it was only about a few years later four years later approximately, that he had begun to, as he was teaching in that environment and as he was rising in prominence and rebutting what they call the philosophers of his time, it's not the same philosophers as today, but those within the Muslim Ummah who had began to adopt foreign ideologies and try to integrate them into Islamic ideas as well. And so he refuted them, he refuted the Botaniya or what is, for that time called what the Ismaili sect was called, for example, and many other ideologies and groups. And so as he began to rise in prominence, he looked out, as my teacher described to me, that he looked out one day as he was teaching and he saw a sea of turbans of just turbans completely engrossed in their notes, hanging on every single word that he would say. He would say a word, people would write it down. And when he looked at this, just imagine an endless sea of turbans and the turban, what that represents is a high level of learning, scholarship. And so he realized that it's not just students, common people, but it's the top scholars of his day are waiting on every single word that he has to say to see what he thinks about it. And at this point, they say that he went through a they call it a spiritual crisis, a crisis of meaning, perhaps an inner journey and a questioning that he tried to block out for a long time. He tried to kind of suppress and that is asking that what is the meaning of all of this? What is what is the what is the the fruit of all of these endeavors. Because what happens is, the reason why it's important to understand this before we get into this text is because the idea of learning sacred knowledge or any knowledge, the benefits are obviously to apply that knowledge. But in the circles of knowledge, one of the tests of seeking knowledge is that it often becomes an end to itself. And whereas many times in the beginning, Seeking knowledge, especially in our time, for example, means that you have to subtract yourself from certain worldly environments. So we're like people of, let's say the world calls us towards wealth and fame and glory and competition, low competition between each other and envy and backbiting and these types of things. Religion and deen are supposed to uplift us and purify us from those things. But what happens is when we study the sciences of deen, And when even religious people get together, the thing that we still bring with us whenever we go into any discipline, including when we come into the practice of deen and the learning of religious sciences is our nafs. That's something that we don't leave behind. It's something we have to keep working on. And so whenever you have a gathering of people, even for the highest level of intention for Allah, we're still always contending with our inner desires and struggling with our egos. And in addition to the Shaitan, who is there to sow seeds of discord, even between people of knowledge. And because knowledge is something that is a means to practicing Deen and preserving Deen, then in the hearts of people who love Deen, in the hearts of the believers, The people who preserve that knowledge and who are most prominent also become popular to them and they become of people who are respected. And then when this respect and popularity comes, then the people of wealth and power also tend to start to patronize those people. And so when this is the nature, I mean, this is the nature of the world. Like, you know, you can talk about the corporate world and when you run away from that and you get into Dean, into spirituality and religion, and then even there you find these issues. So at that point in time, when you get into the upper echelons of spirituality and Dean and knowledge, and you see that the same things that motivate at the lowest level, it still perks the ego up You know, it still kind of revs the ego up the highest level. You have to step back and keep checking your intention and keep checking what you're doing. And so when that knowledge and Imam al-Ghazali, I mean, there's no, I mean, we don't deny that he probably had the best of intentions to begin with and that he had, but it was at his level. He had to ask himself what he was doing, what this all meant. What was the fruit of everything that he was doing? And why is it that even with the knowledge of the dean, these types of feelings in the ego and these types of interactions with others come about that we would only reserve, that we thought were only reserved for worldly interactions. And so he, at this point, it's said as well that he became very ill. thinking about these things and at some point he stopped teaching and then he decided to make a change and a break and he decided to get up and leave his teaching position. He resigned from everything. He left his family with enough provision so he didn't just leave, you know, steal away in the middle of the night, so to speak. And he went on the pretext of going for Hajj. And he goes to visit Mecca and Medina, alhamdulillah, and also on this journey in which he has now thrown off all of his, you could say, his titles, the respect that he's afforded, changing into simple garments, not the garments of the Sheikh al-Islam of his time in that sense, not coming with the presence of the greatest scholar but coming with the the presence wherever he goes of a spiritual seeker and someone who has humbled himself completely in front of his Lord alhamdulillah and really seeking seeking that that inner meaning of what Allah wants from us and it is said that he went to Damascus it is said that he went to it has said that he spent time there as well as to uh to Jerusalem to Al Quds um and that's where he uh He spent time writing the . And so he then, some say, you know, it's also said that he stopped in some other places before returning back some time later. It wasn't very, very long. It wasn't like, we're not talking like 15 years. He left when he was around 45, right? And then he came back about five years later, roughly, no, yeah, some five years later about. And then he would live for another five years . And when he came back, however, he had a completely different perspective from his journey. He had a completely different perspective. And this is where he, where came about, which is the revival of the religious sciences, because he felt in his time that the religious sciences, there was a type of stagnation that had come into the sciences that that there was a type of revival that needed to occur in the spirit of the actual sciences that they were learning. Not just the details because the spirituality is there and the details are lofty and they are meaningful. So this is not what some people try to say that there's a rejection of outward Islam. This is not the case at all. But what he's saying is, do we remember to find the spirituality and the secrets of that connecting with Allah and purifying our hearts through the knowledge that we are seeking? This is why in the Ikhyah, there are four parts to the Ikhyah. And he speaks about knowledge, the book of knowledge, and he speaks about all of the books of fiqh. He goes through all of the chapters of Fiqh and analyzing it from that perspective of that new spiritual dimension that he's speaking about. And he's a master of those sciences, Fiqh and Usul Fiqh and logic and Kalam. And he comes back to speaking about what you really need from these sciences. He comes back to speaking about what scholars need, what students need, what the common person needs. and to tie it all back no matter what level you're on. So he doesn't come back saying, you don't need any of these sciences or the details are not important. He doesn't come back saying that at all. What he comes back to say is that there is no contradiction between religion and spirituality. And this is a problem that we are facing even up to today. There's this idea that, you know, how many times have you heard, you know, somebody say, oh, I'm not religious, but I'm spiritual. Have you heard this, people say that? I'm not too religious, but you know, I'm still spiritual. You know, because there's idea in their minds that the two are different. And this is not, the Prophet , what he brought was holistic, was complete, was perfect. Allah says, I perfected for you on this day your religion. So it's a perfect combination, but how do we realize that? We have to keep rediscovering that, both within ourselves, but also aided by the scholars who renew, they do tajdid of this deen in every single generation. Allah sends scholars and periodically throughout the centuries to revive the depth of that deen. And so this is where he brought the , and it's a magisterial work. And it's quite long as well for anybody who's seen it. It's in four big volumes and in four parts. He speaks about the destructive character traits in the third volume. The fourth one he speaks about the character traits which save one. And so it's a holistic vision of what this deen is. And he's credited as the first, the reason why he is Why he's a trailblazer in this regard is because he's someone who reached the pinnacle of those sciences. Like before that, there was obviously Islamic spirituality being spoken about. There were all the different sciences. The people of the spiritual path have existed in Islam from the beginning. But he basically did what you call like a crossover and then did a hybrid, then blended the two of them, which had not been done in such a systematic fashion in the history of Islam before. And that's why that book, the Ihyad, basically became a game changer and became like a trend for all of the writers thereafter. Even people who might have opposed the book for whatever reason, who might have said in the minority of people, even they would be influenced in the style that he would infuse that spirituality and the details of religion together. He came back-- after some time, he also-- he retired from teaching in public institutions. And he came back to teach privately. And he had a or a ,, a lodge where people came to make dhikr and to purify their hearts. And after some time, he was pressured to return back to his post. But then he finally, in 1110, at the age of 55 years, he went back to his native town of Thus, and he went back to the mercy of Allah and leaving behind many, many works. May Allah have give him the highest levels of Jannah. Some say his works were 58 in number, others say 98. One author has even ascribed 457 works to Imam al-Ghazali. What we know for sure is that in a career like that, there must have been countless works that have never reached us because many things were destroyed. Even Ayyuhulwalad, which was written after the Ikhya towards the end of his life, because the Ayyuhulwalad mentions the Ikhya. And we'll talk about where the Ikhya comes up. He refers to the Ikhya in Ayyuhulwalad, this short Risala. But the fact that we don't have the original manuscript of it or anything even close to the original manuscript of its time But it tells us that it had spread around the Muslim world so much that there were many things that probably have not reached us. So we're very lucky and blessed to have the works that we do have from Imam Al-Ghazali. And Alhamdulillah, as Imam Ibn al-Jawzi records that before his passing away, someone asked him for advice and his answer was, You must have sincerity. You must have sincerity. And it is said that he repeated that phrase until he passed away. Others mentioned that towards the end of his life he became very close to the study of the sciences of hadith became very close to his heart as a way of connecting to the Prophet towards the end of his life and that he gave a lot of attention to hearing and to studying the hadith of the Prophet , although obviously that discipline was not something that he was not an expert in from before that, alhamdulillah. And this is why at this point now, Imam al-Ghazali leaves behind all of these works, the most well-known of them being the Ikhya, to the point where this work, the Ikhya, is so widespread and quoted in the Muslim world that it even affects, his ideas even go on to influence European philosophers. And the Ikhya is actually, they say, the most quoted Islamic text after the Quran and the Sunnah. in the entire tradition of our literature. And it has also been said, and obviously this is by way of hyperbole, that were all the books of Islam to be lost, accepting only the Ihya, it would suffice. to replace them all. But they don't mean the Ihyya is enough in the Quran and Sunnah are not important. Udubillah. Nobody should interpret it like that. It's by way of hyperbole, meaning that the essence of the core of the teachings of the Quran and the Sunnah of the Prophet are encapsulated in this lengthy work to the extent where the core meanings of our sources can be traced back through the works of Imam al-Ghazali, specifically the Ihyya. So alhamdulillah, that's a kind of an overview and that puts us into the place now where we're at to be able to begin to look at the Ayuhulwalat. And it is also said that Imam Al-Ghazali had a lot of care and attention towards early childhood education. So he spoke and had a lot of concern with how to raise children. But the fact that he calls his student O son, O child, it makes you realize that tarbiya is something that doesn't stop. This idea of, what does tarbiya mean? As you know, the word rab, it's related to the word rab, which is to raise something from a lower degree to higher and higher degrees of perfection gradually. And so this tarbiya is something that he speaks about even when a child is young. But that continues and continues. And so that even a senior scholar, right, that , that there is always someone who is more knowledgeable. There is always more that we could get. There's always more that we can learn to continue to refine ourselves. For the sake of who? For the sake of Allah . And so this is where we begin. the setting of the Ihyya now the context that he wrote the Ihyya we spoke about that and in Ayuhulwalad itself why is it relevant today why would the Ayuhulwalads be relevant today the Ayuhulwalad is like a distillation as we'll see of the Ihyya it is a it is um his student asking him you know the student that again is nameless that we don't know who he is except Allah knows who he is and asks him give me some advice like I know that you have the Ihyya His students would have poured over the Ehyah, probably memorized the Ehyah, but give me some advice that I can walk with, something I can hold on to, put in my pocket, a couple of pages that I can just keep with me, dear to me, close to my heart. Because this is what you, when you love someone and when you respect them and you look up to them, you always ask them for advice. And even if they've advised you for their whole lives, when it comes to you going on a long journey or parting from them or entering a new phase of life, it's very common that someone above will tell the person who is younger or their student, few words of parting words of advice. Just remember, if you can't remember everything, Imam Ghazali is showing us, just hold onto a few key words And if you can keep those close to you, then it can actually give you the benefit of the entire whole. And why is that relevant today? Why is Ayuhulwalat, the epistle, dear beloved son or youth, why is it relevant today? Because we are also going through a similar crisis. And in fact, in every generation to continue to bring back the spiritual relevance and meaning into the Islamic sciences. To me, this is no, you can see this in a modern context, you see this on the internet, right? If you're on social media or whatever, you see this on the internet. You look at the way that Muslims interact with one another. You look at the way that people use religion to debate each other, to put each other down. You would think that the conversation is completely worldly, that they're talking about lofty ideals. lofty ideals, talking about Ijtihad and talking about, you know, even quoting Quran and Hadith, and yet dealing with each other with a Akhlaq, a character that is, it is completely out of place in a religious context. You see religion being used to pump up the ego as a means of gaining following, gaining likes, gaining these types of things, it hasn't gone away, the Shaitan and the ego are something that is part of the human condition and only Allah and turning back to Him will solve that condition. So Ayuwal is very relevant for our time. So inshaAllah with that we'll begin the text. Bismillahar Rahman Rahim By the way, you know, I actually would let me I didn't get to read this and I apologize the slides inshallah can be added to the to the course page inshallah soon just as a quote because I wanted to just I didn't want to you know, there are many different praises that you can get of Imam Al-Ghazali but I wanted to read what Imam Al-Dahabi said about Imam Al-Ghazali and Imam Al-Dahabi as you know was a pretty tough critic of Hadith pretty tough evaluator of the narrators of Hadith. He was considered as one of the greatest scholars of that genre of Hadith narrator criticism, what's called Jarhahu ta'adil. And he was so prominent in his field that Ibn Hajar al-Asqalani, the greatest commentator on Sahih al-Bukhari, the author of Fatl Bari, he was called the Amir al-Mutmineen in Hadith. Ibn Hajar al-Sqalani, when he used to drink Zamzam water, he used to say to Allah, ask Allah to get Imam al-Dahabi's position, status in Hadith. So Imam al-Dahabi says in his Seer Alam al-Nuballah, his great biographical work of basically all of the prominent figures of Islam, he calls Imam al-Ghazali, he says, Ashaykh al-Imam, al-Bahr, hujjat al-Islam. Ajubat Zaman he says he says Imam al-Ghazali and he named Abuhammad Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Ghazali the Sheikh the Imam the ocean the proof of Islam the wonder of his of the age Zainuddin the adornment of this religion Abuhammad Muhammad ibn Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Tusi al-Shafi al-Ghazali Sahabat al-Sanif the author of many works and an overflowing abundant intelligence and brilliance. And he ended that, he goes on, he has a huge biographical entry on Imam al-Ghazali where he speaks about his life and he also does criticism, like later scholars did of every scholar, of some of the ideas here and there. But he ends by saying, , and so may Allah have mercy on Imam Abu Hamid where fa'aina mithahu fi olumihi or fada'ilihi Then where can you find the like of him in his knowledges and in his virtues? So alhamdulillah, with this we begin, Bismillahir Rahmanir Rahim. The letter begins, Alhamdulillahi Rabbil Alameen. Wal aakibatu lil muttaqeen. Wala alihi. Just a second. Alhamdulillahi Rabbil Alameen wal aqibatulal muttaqeen was salatu wassalam ala nabihi Muhammad wala alihi wa sahbi ajmaeen these words Allah he begins with the praise that Allah himself begins his book the Quran with alhamdulillahi Rabbil Alameen and the reason why many scholars chose This as the way of beginning their works is because Allah himself began the Quran with this. And it is said that creation can try to praise Allah but they will never praise Allah to the level that he deserves. And this is why as a mercy from Allah Allah himself praised himself in pre-eternity. by saying Alhamdulillahi Rabbil Alameen the all praise is to Allah the essence of praise is to Allah every single praise is to is for Allah alone Rabbil Alameen the Lord of all the worlds and so Allah praised himself in pre eternity and then gave us this statement in the Quran in order for us to repeat because we are completely unable to praise him with anything other than his own words that would give the haqq to that praise and then he continues ... that praise be to Allah the Lord of all of the realms of being ... is not the worlds it's different kingdoms of creation that's what it really means different realms of creation and the end and the final destination or abode is for those who have taqwa is for those who have Taqwa and you hear this often in the Khutbas, Friday, Juma Khutbas, Alhamdulillah, Rabbil Alameen, Wala Akibatulil Muttaqeen, Wala Udwana illa al-Abdwalameen for example and what does that mean when it means that the end is for those of Taqwa the people of Taqwa are those people who are conscious of Allah , the Muttaqeen are those who are God conscious you can translate that as God fearing for example but what it represents is those people for whom Allah is their one concern. And the word taqwa as we know comes from tuka, ittika, it means to parry away a blow. So if you know in sword fighting for example, if a blow is coming towards you and you take your sword and you parry that away, that's called ittika. And so what is a person of taqwa doing is that they are warding off sin from themselves and the punishment of the hellfire. by avoiding that which Allah has made Haram those things which he does not like those things which bring him away further from Allah and adorning themselves with things that bring themselves that bring them closer to Allah and so Taqwa is something that is not only about the limbs but it's also about the tongue it's also about the gaze it's about the ears and ultimately it's about the heart with Allah when there's Taqwa inside the heart the prophet said that Taqwa God-fearingness, God-consciousness is here, right? He's trying to say that Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam that taqwa is not just in the clothes that you wear or walking around with your gaze like this necessarily, but taqwa, it starts here and then it plays itself out on all of the limbs because the heart is that vessel that if the heart is corrupt, then that corruption reaches the rest of the limbs, you don't sin and you don't do wrong unless something is wrong inside you. The one whose thoughts are corrupt, their actions will be corrupt. But the one whose heart is sound, that person's actions will be sound and wholesome and pleasing to Allah. So this is who the end is for. What does it mean in the end? Who are the winners in the end? They are the muttaqeen. Who are those who attain the ultimate success? It is them. That's why we say the end is for them, everybody will reach the end, sinners and saints alike will reach the end. But who are the winners on that day, on the day of judgment for eternity? It is those people of Taqwa. And even in this introduction, even in these two, like one line of an introduction, the commentators say that they're employing a technique called Baraatul istihlal. It is a way of speaking about using your introduction to give a hint at what the rest of the material is gonna be about. So he starts with Alhamdulillahi Rabbil Alameen, which is Allah's pre-eternal praise for himself, the way he begins the Fatiha, the opening chapter of the Quran, speaking about the beginning, and then he speaks about the end. To emphasize that in the beginning is the praise of Allah. And when we begin with the praises of Allah and that really takes root in our heart, then our end will be inshallah one of those be to be among those of the muttaqeen. So he talks about the beginning and the end. He speaks about the praise of Allah in the beginning, which is what our focus should be on. And that in the end, he's giving the point of it, the point of this book, the point of what we're studying, the point of all of the Islamic sciences is at the end to gain taqwa. So right there, he gives us a hint as to what he's going to speak about. There are some different manuscripts to add. And as we know, Allah says in the Qur'an, Innallahu malaikatahu yusalu unahalan nabi ya ayuladina amanu salu alaihi wa salimu tasleema That verily Allah and His angels send blessings upon the Prophet. All you who believe, send abundant blessings upon him, wa salimu tasleema And send prayers of peace, either continuously or it could also mean to submit to his just to send it in a way of submission towards the Sunnah and the prophet excuse me and all of the commentators of of Islam would would begin with the praise of Allah and the Salawat on the prophet and then add in at the end a prayer for the Sahaba and all of the Muslims because every single every single it is every single mu'min as the as the narration goes is from the aal of the prophet from the people of the prophet and it also shows when we say upon his companions that this is the way of Ahl Sunnah that we have love and respect and reverence for all of the prophetic companions not just like some groups would choose some over the others and differentiate between them and then the Risala continues Anna Wahidan mina Talabatil mutaqaddimien lazama khidmata shaykhil imam zainuddin hujatal Islam Abihamad Muhammad ibn Muhammad al-Ghazali and know many times they would start their their texts with just know this like listen up it's like saying know this and many times when you're reading it on a teacher you would change it to ulima it is known because you don't want to tell your teacher know this that one of the senior students kept company, kept very close to the service of the Sheikh, the Imam, the adornment of religion, Zainuddin, Hujjat al-Islam, the proof of Islam, Abuhammad Muhammad and Muhammad al-Ghazali. And so this part that's beginning is describing that student who wrote to him. So obviously that now there there's speculation, who wrote this introduction, right? Who wrote, like, did he write that he himself wrote that, that I'm one of the senior students? Maybe, but it's kind of, it might be unlikely. There could be possibility that either the student himself added that in to the top of his letter, just to give context to it, or it could be that the Imam who was receiving it, Imam al-Ghazali maybe wrote that in. Or it could be that when that letter was found by someone else, that perhaps as a way of preserving for posterity what was going on in the letter, that they wrote a kind of a caption at the top so that we could know what the context was because without that, this caption, we would not even understand what's going on. It might just be a short letter from Imam Ghazali, but we don't know that it's an exchange. So this is what's telling us it's a result of an exchange and so this student The advanced senior student kept the company of Imam al-Ghazali. And he worked hard in the acquiring and the reading of knowledge upon Imam al-Ghazali. Because this is how the tradition of Islam passed on knowledge. It wasn't through being an autodidact. Oh, I've got a great library. I've got endless articles on the internet, on a website to read about. This is not how Islamic knowledge was passed on traditionally and this is not how it should be done today. And this is not how it's done even up to our time, which is to work hard to acquire and to read knowledge on who on your teacher. Meaning reading knowledge with your teacher, they're reading it to you, you're reading it to them, they're checking, they're correcting your misunderstandings, your mistakes. And so there's that exchange. Until the student collected and gathered together the subtle points, the very fine points of all the different sciences. and perfected the virtues of his nafs, of his ego. So this student, we're not just talking about a freshman or a sophomore, we're talking about someone who was probably one of the prominent scholars of his day, but still under Imam al-Ghazali. And so it also tells us that they worked on the general points of knowledge and then after years began to access the finer points of knowledge, because one of the mistakes that we also see Very common, and when people are starting out as well, this is a common mistake, which is to go after the before the assas, before the foundation of knowledge. Because when we get excited about learning, and this is not a bad thing, we get excited, we are revved up and encouraged by seeing what these scholars attained, and then somewhere or another we catch a whiff of advanced subjects or polemics or these subtleties and we become enamored by chasing after them. And sometimes we forget that in order, before you go to high school, you go to elementary school. Before you go to university, you do the education that is fit for that level. You don't have to go to high school. But what I mean is that you study one thing before the other, and it's a gradual process. And this is what they're saying here. Until he gathered the finer points of knowledge and then, but is it enough to just gather all the fine points of all of the different subjects? No. But the second thing is that they perfected, the student perfected the virtues of the soul, the nafs. And that's when it becomes, nafs can be ego, nafs can be soul, spirit. When it is connected to the lower desires, when it is connected to the base character traits of a person, that's when we call it the nafs. But when it is connected to the lofty character traits, when it is connected to the remembrance of Allah , this is when we start calling that same nafs, the ruha. So it's actually not two different or three or five different entities. It's really that one essence inside a person that is not tangible, that is called different things. So that is an essential part of knowledge as well, which is to refine that aspect of oneself as part of knowledge. And so it goes on. Then after he had gathered all of these finer points of knowledge and perfected the virtues of the soul. Then he began to ponder one day over the state of his soul. And these thoughts started to come to him. So this is what the student is going through. Now, whose experience does that sound like? Imam Razali's experience before him. Because this is something that occurs naturally with a student of knowledge as they're going through their studies that they began to think about, I've been learning so much because studies It demands that you are paying attention from yourself out to something. You're reading a book, you're in a lecture, you're making notes, you're memorizing, you're writing an exam. And then later on you flip to taking something in, but you're teaching, you're helping, you're advising, you're answering, you're researching. When is there time to look at yourself? In reality, the way that things are set up in the world Introspection is something that you have to take time out for. It's not built in to the different things that we, even in our workday, for example, for those of us who are professionals or they're working in different capacity as parents, whatever we're doing, the world is always calling us to participate in it. But at some point in time, in the flow of life, we have to stop and take stock of ourselves. not for the purposes of a midlife identity crisis, which is what can happen if you don't stop and realize where you're going, right, until it's like very late. But it's that stopping once in a while to do muhasabah, to ask yourself, what am I doing this for? Whether it's going to work, whether it's raising my children, whether it's mowing the lawn, whether it's seeking the Islamic sciences, it's to ask ourselves, what are we doing? And And then this student said to himself, . And then this student said to himself, I have studied and read so many, all the different types of knowledge, all the different fields, fiqh, and usul, and nahu, and kalam, and mantiq, and all of these different sciences. And I have spent out the prime of my life. On learning it and gathering all these knowledges. And that now the time has come, it is befitting for me to know which of all these types of knowledges will benefit me tomorrow because it perhaps it happens that this student, this senior scholar who is coming as a student to Imam al-Ghazali, he's seeing that I have many books in my library. I have many different points of knowledge, many debates, many answers. But what of it is actually going to help me when I meet Allah ? What of it is actually going to save me on the day of judgment from my own self? And what is going to get me into the graces of Allah on that day? and will keep me company and give me solace and give me familiar company in my grave with me. What am I taking with me to my grave? Was it just the memorization of facts? Was it just ticking off how many courses that I did, how many conferences I went to, how many posts I made, you know, ejazes I collected, classes I taught? No. Is it, what is it? It's what I'm taking into my grave with me. That is what we all need to be asking ourselves from what we are studying. Alhamdulillah. And . And which of all these sciences that I've learned will not benefit me? So that I can leave them, stop continuing in them. So . Just like the Prophet said, so now he's backing up what he's saying in case you ask, is there a type of knowledge that does not benefit? He's saying, just like the Prophet said, O Allah, I seek refuge in you from knowledge, any type of knowledge that does not benefit. And subhanAllah, this is not somebody who's in a university speaking or on the internet doing Wikipedia research. He's a scholar and he's speaking about different subjects that he encounters in his time. And so it is in this context that he's saying, which of it is not gonna benefit me? Now, what is knowledge that is not beneficial? It could be knowledge that is either haram to learn, something that is unlawful to learn, or knowledge that is disliked. It's something that is not unlawful to learn, but if there's no Sharia countenance to benefit for it, then it would be disliked. Or it is something in which there is no niya for it. So there could be types of knowledge, for example, that are not haram or not makruh, but they are, there's no niya for it. So you're just learning about, you know, some subject with no intention to help others to improve yourself through it for Allah's sake. It's just for the mere for like a hobby's sake. Now in this, it's not saying that you can't have a hobby that you look into. Like I like to learn about Indian history, for example, certain types of Indian history. I like it. But do I have a niyah for Allah? I have to ask myself for that. Because if not, then no one's saying that it's haram to do that. No one's saying it's dislike to do that. But it's not gonna benefit you in the end. So you can read all you want about the cuisine of a certain area of a certain country. You can read as much as you want about it. But it's not necessarily something that will benefit you in the end, unless you put a good intention to it. And every type of knowledge, every type of knowledge that is not forbidden, there is a good intention that you can perhaps find. in order to learn that even if others don't see the benefit in it. Like for example, even the act of preserving knowledge for the sake of edifying your mind, for the sake of serving others, for the sake of learning more about Allah's creation to thank him. These are all good intentions. Or the fourth type of knowledge that does not benefit is that type of knowledge which is not gonna be followed up by action. And this is perhaps the most, the trickiest one for the student of knowledge. Alhamdulillah, everybody here, we're all gathered here today. We're not speaking about some irreligious or a topic that has nothing to do, no benefit to be gained in. Everyone who's come here, everyone who's watching, sitting from wherever you're sitting, whether you're on your phone or you're on your computer or wherever you are in your homes, everyone here has some intention that they're tuning into this. It's not being displayed in the middle of downtown. But while we're here for good intentions, it will not benefit us until we put this knowledge into action. And this is where the subtle trick comes into the student of knowledge. Learning a lot of things, even for the best intention. But then you know all this stuff, but tell me, where is it in your life? Tell me, where is it when you actually put it into your life? Does it adorn you? And again, we're not talking about the robotic type of details because you can become robotic. When is dean robotic? It's not a robotic thing in itself, but it becomes robotic when you don't have the spirit of the dean in what you're doing. So even something like spirituality, the funny thing is spirituality is there to breathe life into the other sciences, but even spirituality when we stop checking ourselves, can actually become just as robotic as the things that we are trying to breathe life into, when it becomes formalized, when it becomes about your group. And we see this all the time, especially online. People from different spiritual traditions, you know, badmouthing each other, fighting with each other, putting each other, you know, backbiting, comparing, one upping each other, showing off to each other, thinking that, My way is better than your way, my sheikh is better than your sheikh and these types of things. So there is that type of stagnation that comes about and this becomes then even something that is lofty and very beneficial can become something that does not benefit. And it's also very possible that somebody who is even teaching a certain type of knowledge, they may not benefit from that knowledge, but the person that they're giving it to takes it and applies it for Allah's sake and they benefit, which is one of the strangest things about knowledge as well. It's very strange and teachers, this is why teachers as well have to continuously, you know, whether we're teaching in a formal setting or whether we're teaching our own children, whether we're teaching in halakahs, whether we're just advising as mentorship, you know, it's so strange that you could give a point of knowledge to someone and you don't know it, but they are an arifbillah, that they are someone who knows Allah experientially, one to one. And you think you're teaching that person. You think I know more than you. You think this person is a student and I'm a teacher and you're giving them that knowledge and you don't realize that they are interacting with Allah experientially through their hearts with that little bit. And they've taken that and gone to Allah with that. Whereas the teacher maybe just be, so this is why it's very important for student and teacher, all of us, everyone is equal in front of these advices that Imam al-Ghazali is giving. And so then he goes on to, so which of this is going to benefit me in the hereafter? And which of it will not benefit me? And he brings the hadith to prove in case someone says, well, how can you say that Islamic knowledge is not going to benefit you? And these are the ways that it may not benefit you. And so these ideas went on and on and on in this person's mind, . These ideas continued, you know, ideas tend to play on your mind until he wrote to his eminence, the Sheikh, the proof of Islam, Muhammad al-Ghazali, Abu Muhammad al-Ghazali, , may Allah have mercy on him. So he wrote to him , he wrote to him asking to seek fatwa on this matter. Although usually the word fatwa is reserved for legal questions, but in this case, it means to seek his answer on this question. And he asked Imam al-Ghazali in this letter for a number of questions. And what this also shows us is that when you have questions in the deen, no matter how big of a scholar you become, When those thoughts start coming to your mind and you have these questions and it's bothering you, get it out and ask. Write to someone who knows more than you, who you trust and ask because asking is the only way that we will be able to get a solution to our problems. It doesn't just come by constantly turning it over and over and over necessarily once that confusion is there. So you ask, and this is just gonna take a side step here, this is what the whole point of a question and answer service is. It's so people who have these thoughts that are plagging them, that are these thoughts that are continuously recurring and blocking them from getting closer to Allah or blocking them from feeling like they are advancing spiritually, they need to get these questions out. And this is why as well, the idea of question and answer is something that goes back to the very beginning of our deen. And it is itself a manifestation of the Rahma of Allah on earth. The act of asking and answering a question and supporting that venture. If you're not one of those who are asking and you're not one of those who are answering, then you can be one of those who are supporting the questions and the answers reaching the people that it should reach. And this is why he writes this letter, Istifta'an to Imam al-Ghazali and he asks, a number of different questions, so we don't have the original letter. And he sought sincere counsel, and he sought the dua of the Shaykh. And this is what tells us, there's so many IjfaAllah, just in this footnote, in this caption, before we even get into Imam Ghazali's words, we've learned so much. What did he write, what did he ask for, and what should we seek when we speak to a scholar? We ask for advice, we ask obviously for the first thing, masa'il, questions. These are my actual questions. Then advice. What do you think I should do about it? What do you think I should do about this? Oh Sheikh or Sheikha. And dua. At the end we say, Sheikha, Ustada, Sheikh, Ustada, make dua for me, please. Please make dua for me because we know that not only the answers of our teachers and the scholars and sincere advice on how to navigate that knowledge but also their prayers at the end are what we care for the most. And this is why some people, they may not even ask a question, but they just want the dua of that scholar, of that teacher, of that saintly individual. So he wanted to ask some questions for the advice and the prayers. of Imam al-Ghazali, so that he could read over that advice in his spare time, from time to time. Qala, and then the student continues, and even though the works of the Sheikh, the Imam, al-Ghazali, just like the Ikhya, so he calls Imam al-Ghazali the Sheikh and the Imam. And the commentator mentions that the word Sheikh implies an experience of action. Someone who is ahead in the application and the actions of implementing their knowledge. And the Imam is the one who has mastered the knowledge itself. So that's why he calls him a Shaykh al-Imam. He goes, even though the Shaykh has had many different works, such as the Ihya al-Mudin that we spoke about. And those works, like the Ikhya more than answer my question. He's saying this, the Ikhya contains the answers to all my questions. Then why is he writing this? Like in Maksudi, but my point, that the Sheikh, Imam al-Ghazali, writes my needs, fi waraqatin, in just a few pieces of paper. So he's saying, I see the Ikhya is here, but if you said here, read the Ikhya. as an answer to my question. It's like, how am I gonna, you know, read through the entire thing? So he's saying, oh Sheikh, just condense everything into a few pages and I'll suffice with that. That those few pages I can keep with me, you know, close to my heart for my entire lifespan, for the time that I'm alive. You can tell the relationship between these two individuals must have been very strong. And I can act on these few pages. For as long as my days last, you know, as long as his lifespan is, Insha Allah, if Allah wills. And this is where Imam Al-Ghazali wrote this epistle in response. So that is just the caption and Imam Al-Ghazali begins. How much time do we have left? Probably a few minutes? Okay, inshallah. Bismillah Rahman Raheem, Imam al-Ghazali begins with the Basmila, . Know, oh child, oh dear beloved son, oh youth. And this is where Imam al-Ghazali begins. This letter and this series of advices, every paragraph he begins with the words, , or in Farsi, , oh my dear son oh my child oh youth and the way he begins he said and the the honored respected beloved may Allah uh may Allah extend your life through his obedience. So he begins by addressing him, then makes a dua for him. So what does it tell us right away? He addresses him, but he addresses him with a fatherly, in a fatherly way, right? Not a patronizing way, in a fatherly way, in a loving way. He begins by calling his student his son. And this is a lesson for any of us who are teaching anyone or imparting anything on anyone else, do we, for example, even our children, obviously with our children, we usually behave in a parental fashion, but it's the love. And it's especially with people that may not be related to us, people that we don't know, people that are asking us for advice. Do we come in a brotherly fashion? Do we come in a sisterly fashion in a way that a parent would have mercy on their child? But at the same time, so he's not just saying, Hey kid, are you halwalad? It literally means, Oh son, oh boy, oh child. But then he adds, Walmuhib al-Aziz to let you know that it's not just about him saying, I'm older than you. It's also about saying, You're beloved to me. And Aziz is something that is very rare, meaning you're special. Basically, it's saying you're special to me. You're someone who I care about the fact that you're asking me this question. And he says, may Allah, then he comes with the dua, may Allah increase your life through his dua, through his obedience, through acts of worship. Because one of two things could be implied here, right? That either, right, he's saying that through those acts of obedience, may your lifespan be increased. Or it could be May Allah increase your lifespan to do more acts of obedience. So it's both are possible. The Prophet was asked, who is the best of people, ya Rasulullah? He says, The best of people is the one whose lifespan is long and their works are good because they fill their life with beneficial things, doing things for others, doing things for Allah, and this is why the pursuit of longevity is in itself something that could be applied to becoming the best of people, and it is not something that is wrong. Our lifespan will not be ever longer than the Ajal, the time span that Allah has put. However, there is a type of destiny, as we know from Aqeedah, that is suspended destiny. It's . It is suspended. Based on the actions of good that we do, such as kindness to our parents and other acts, there may be doors that open to extend our time here on earth, but it is when that final time is written, nothing can change that. But there are things that we can do to put more barakah in our time and to extend and expand our lifespans. And this is through Allah's good. And we'll end with the last two lines. And may he, Allah, make you traverse the path of those whom he loves. Because if you love Allah, then you will traverse the path of those whom Allah loves, and this is why one of the greatest duas is that he is asking, May Allah make you tread that path of the people that He loves, so that we gain that Allah of Allah . And he says, Inna Manshur al-Nasihah that the proclamation of giving good advice Yuqtabin ma'adinarisala is written from the storehouse or the treasure, the mine of messengership, of prophethood, meaning the advice should be given from the example of the Prophet , from the person of the Prophet . This is where we get our advice. And he's being humble by beginning like this because he's saying, look, you're asking me for my advice, but I'll just tell you that you want advice, I'm gonna go to the Prophet . So I'm not saying I know this and I know this, he's saying the first place you go to for advice is to the lofty personality, the being of the Rasool . And if the Prophet's naseeha has reached you because he's a scholar, he's read the hadith before, he's studied the sunnah, and if that well-meaning advice and teaching of the Prophet has reached you, then why do you need my advice? He's saying, if you've already studied all these things from the Sunnah, then you don't need my advice. This is the humility of Imam al-Ghazali. And if that advice from the Prophet has not reached you, then tell me. He's saying, Then what have you gained in all of these years? of studying and seeking knowledge and this is what he's telling his senior student that if you're asking me for advice look for it in the Sunnah of the Prophet whose path you claim to have followed and whose Dean you claim to have studied and whose knowledge that you came to claim to have collected and look inside there did you see the answers to the knowledge the answers to the advices that you're asking me the spiritual guidance that you're asking did you find it there because if you did then you don't need me to tell you anything the Sunnah This is when they say Quran and Sunnah is enough, it's true if we understand what the Quran and Sunnah is saying and if we're applying its meanings according to the way of scholarship and the way of the tradition of Ahlul Sunnah. So he's saying, if you have that, then you don't need my advice. If you don't have that, then why have you been studying all these years? It's not to say I'm not gonna advise you. It's to say start reflecting, start thinking and teaching the student who is asking to also be able to gain their own guidance at some point in time from the Prophet directly, from the Sunnah, from the Quran. Let it speak to you. Don't just gather the details of it. Let it speak to your heart and let it be something that guides you in your life. This is what he's saying. And he's putting his words second to that. And so he's asked that question and he begins in the next paragraph. He begins now with his advices taken from the prophetic teaching and we will cover that inshallah we've gone to 9 p.m. we started a little bit late today because of some technicalities so I'm sorry about that inshallah tomorrow next week Tuesday inshallah will begin at 7:30 EST inshallah are there any questions any comments yes That's a very good question. That's a good question. And by the way, if there are any questions from the live stream or online, people can type that up as well and it can be conveyed to us or we can take those up next week. So the question is, what is the difference between Imam al-Ghazali's work, Bida'at al-Hidayah, The Beginning of Guidance, and Ayuh al-Walad? The difference is this, Bida'at al-Hidayah is a work that Imam al-Ghazali wrote as a primer. as an introduction towards this path. And it is meant, it is applicable to the beginner, the novice student, a person who is starting out on that path, Imam al-Ghazali is trying to guide him, 'cause you're not the first person who asked that question or who laid that out. This is actually mentioned in some works. And the Ayuh al-Walad is actually addressed to a scholar, it's to a senior student. So even though we are taking it up amongst ourselves, we're actually sitting in on a discussion between senior scholars. But the difference is that this is just as applicable to us, you know, even at our stage. So Biratul Hidayah will give us benefits that we may not get out of this. And this book may give us benefits that we may not get out of that book because they're written almost for two different audiences, but it doesn't mean that it's to show first of all that the essence comes back to the same thing, but it's addressed to two different audiences and will obviously only be able to take from this work what Allah allows us to take from this work. But imagine like somebody like Hujat al-Islam Imam al-Ghazali speaking to a senior student and a scholar. What they're understanding may be up here. And what we're trying to get is some of that. We're trying to glean that. So in one sense, our taking a peek into this is kind of punching above our weight. We're stepping above the level. But it's a big blessing as well to be able to see that if we're all on the path to knowledge, all those who are studying here through seeker's guidance and taking other classes online, that in the end, this is what the scholars talk about anyways. It goes back to the same advices that the beginning of guidance would speak about. So that's the kind of difference. And you'll notice here that in this work, there will be references and they're gonna take it for granted that you know certain things. 'Cause he's talking about Hayyad al-Mudin in this work. So it shows it was written afterwards, towards the end of his life. So it implies that the reader has actually read all of Hayyad al-Mudin. Now, who among us has read the entire Hayyad al-Mudin? It's very rare, right? So this is why it implies that you're coming into it with something. So inshallah we'll try our best as well to point out where those subtle points where some background is needed. We'll try to fill that in inshallah. Are there any other questions? There's a question. At what point does one recognize they are fit to cheat? fit to teach? Is it through the advice of one's teachers? How does one battle with imposter syndrome? Should one always see oneself as a student? OK. Did the sound go through to the stream? They heard that. OK. So that's a very good question. And it's kind of a tough question on my first day sitting here at Seekers Guidance. In reality, you never feel that you're fit to teach. We're only doing Imtithalan li Amr al-Mashaykh. And Sheikh Raz taught me this many years ago. When he asked me to 1st teach, I said, I can't do this. And he said, look, we don't do this because we think we're ready for it. and I walk with this for many years and I'm going to say the same thing today, is that we don't do this because we think we're ready for it. We think we're fit. The minute you think that you're fit or ready for it, in terms of that, you're in for something to show you that you're probably not, or if you're lucky. If you're not lucky, you keep going with that. with that with that delusion until the ego wrestles us down. May Allah save us from that. In reality, we're never fit. What we say is that we are following in the footsteps or the commands of our teachers. So this is why in this tradition, you wait till your teachers tell you to teach, even if it's years and years. Even if it's years and years and years, you study. You do what your Mashiach asks you to do, and the nafs will want to run out and teach. The nafs will want to run out and say, I'm doing this now. I'm doing this now. Look at me, I'm teaching this. The nafs will want to say that. But you stop until that time comes where your teachers tell you, Okay, go ahead, do this. Or you consult them. And there are also ways to know, and you have to know what level you're teaching at. So someone just because they study one book doesn't mean that they go to a university and start to lecture. So it's important to know as well. Now that being said, it doesn't mean that we have the imposter syndrome because when we have the imposter syndrome, then it's almost like we are saying that we are teaching through ourselves, through our own selves and our abilities. And this is what will cause us to have that. When you say, Who am I? Why do I belong here? I don't deserve this. This should not be something that's in our minds. If we say, oh Allah, I'm just doing this because this is the position that I've been put in and I have to help other people. Oh Allah, what am I supposed to do? I need your help. And this is an internal conversation in the end. So it's not describable necessarily, but that imposter syndrome, you realize that what are we doing here anyways? Like what did I do to even deserve my imam? What did I do to even earn the fact that I can say Allah's name? That I can say Rasulullah . All these things are blessings from Allah. So we have to keep reminding ourselves that this is something that comes from Allah and it is for the sake of Allah and if we were left to our own devices, we would fail miserably. But it's not about how we perform or how we speak or how we do that. It's constantly bringing ourselves back to Allah, asking for the duas of our teachers and the advice of our teachers, and then realizing that this is not between a better and worse or higher and lower level, but we're all brothers and sisters on this path. The delusion of who's sitting here on this side of the mic and who's sitting on that side, this should not be a delusion that we fall into, but we're brothers and sisters at the end of the day, and we are helping one another the one who has made it, go back and give a hand to their brother and sister. That's all. That's all it is. So I hope that answers the question, inshAllah. I'm not, you know, it's not necessarily the best answer, but it's something that we all work through with Allah , ask the advice of our teachers, and ask for the duas most of all. . Is there another question? OK. How does one read books like Ihya and Minhaj Al Abideen? Do we read it by ourselves or with scholars? I haven't read Minhaj Al Abideen. I can't claim I haven't read all of Ihya Al Umuddin either. I was advised a long time ago by my teacher to read a page every day as just a kind of a reading. In the end, Once one, it's always best to take the advice and the duas of one's teachers before reading, and it doesn't mean every single book you pick up, you have to ask them, you know, but you should know if it's something like a big undertaking, the is a big project, it's like it's a major thing, and it speaks at a high level. Remember, it's about speaking to scholars. It's not a book for the layperson, so it's always best to get that insight. Well, what do you think to your teacher? Ask them, what do you think? And when you have questions, you have someone to go back to, like, I didn't get this. Because the worst thing is to get into something that you don't understand, misunderstand it, misapply it, misteach it. And then come back years later and we don't wanna be in that position. So that's why it's always best to, in a major undertaking, like reading a book like that, and also to know where one is, to know where one is at. Remember we talked about getting the foundations of religion, of the sciences before the , that was what they said. So we should know if like first shot, we wanna go to , it's probably better that we start with . all of us that we start with and eventually work our way up. But there's nothing wrong with reading the parts that have been translated, the parts that are explained by teachers. So mixing between reading on one's own and advice from a teacher or attending the lessons of the teachers, over the years it all starts to combine into one. And it all starts to be something that you've heard before. So some people here have gone through Ayuwalwala multiple times. Right? For example, so it's something that becomes more of a lifestyle. So I wouldn't say that you have to read everything now by yourself. You can pick something that everyone knows their level and what they can be honest with. And if it's calling you to something, a level of practice that is way too high, one should come down for the sake of applying it the best. So reading a very high flung spirituality book is is not the best if we can't apply it. So read what we can apply and what we can understand and what we can handle. That's the advice I would say. Just like you would never pick up a textbook of a subject that is way more advanced than what you can handle. In the same way in this case, except that we're applying, we try to apply everything when we learn it, inshallah. How can we implement the lessons of the book? can we also extract lessons from the book while doing the course? How can we extract lessons of the book? So can you repeat the last part please? How can we implement lessons from the book? Can we also extract lessons from the book while doing the course? Oh definitely, that's why we're here. That's a good question. So that's a good question because the whole point of us reading the book is to get the lessons from the book. Not only for Imam Al-Ghazali is saying, but what we're reading between the lines of what he's saying. So we're trying to get as many lessons as we can out of it to try to implement. It may only be one thing that we learned from this book that Imam Al-Ghazali said, or that he didn't say, but it's between the lines or that a commentator said, and that could change our lives and that could make us reach Allah and his good pleasure. So definitely be avid for that which benefits you. There's no other prophet said, so no doubt we take as many lessons as we can and we try to pull out. And there may be things that are occurring in your own minds that in our minds that we don't say, but we say, you know what, there's a lesson I pulled out of that and I'm gonna benefit myself with it. We're not talking about a fiqh ruling, we're not talking about aqeedah, we're not talking about saying like, oh, I don't have to pray anymore because I'm so quiet. No, we're saying these are things that help us towards Allah. be you know don't be so afraid to let let the material speak to your heart to bring you closer to Allah don't that's also another level so like there's like the level of like being carefree and just you know learning whatever you want and applying how you think it should be applied and and all of the misunderstandings and then there's the other level which is being so so super cautious and scared that you have That's imposter syndrome as they talk about, you know, this idea of like, I don't know, can I even like look at this website? Can I even read this answer? Can I even do this? And I would not suggest that although it's cautious and good, but have a little bit of trust in yourself and the ability to go back to your teachers and don't completely restrict yourself from being able to even think about things. as long as it remains within the confines of generally what you know to be Deen. And then 'cause you're always checking back your understanding. Someone who's thinking and reflecting, they go back and ask questions. Someone who's too cautious to even think for themselves, then they don't have the questions that they wish they could have asked the scholars and get insights. The people who, even with the Prophet in his time, the companions loved the desert Arab who would come and ask like these like, you know, very broad based questions because questions bring out benefit. And but that takes thought. So don't be afraid of trying to look at the lessons inshallah and sharing them with us as well. If we have a forum for the course, inshallah, the forum for the course, the forum for the course will be will be up soon. Yeah. So there'll be a forum as well where people can not only share their questions, but also share the insights that they that they gleaned and gained. And so we can all benefit from that inshallah. OK, inshallah. Kulukawi hada astaqrahli walakubalisal Muslims, astaqrahlu inhua forhima sallallahu alayhi wa sallam. Asalamu alaykum wa rahatu.
