Bismillahir Rahmanir Raheem Alhamdulillahi Rabbin Alameen Sallallahu Alayhi Muhammadana Ali Wassahbi Yajma'een Subhanakala ilmalana ilama alamdana inna kantalalimul Hakim Allahumma alimna maayin fauna wan fa'anabimatu Alimuna Waziddamin fadlika alimuna ta'alima inna kaala kulishayin qadir Sallallahu Alayhi Muhammadana Ali Wassalamu Alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatu Alhamdulillah, we are here for the fifth lesson of Imam Al-Ghazali's dear beloved son explained, Ayuhul Walad, advice for living right, Alhamdulillah. And this lesson, we call it the summary of knowledge. As you know, Imam Al-Ghazali has been speaking about the idea that knowledge for its own sake is that there's no merit in it. There's no merit in knowledge for its own sake. And that knowledge without without action is a proof against the one who is learning, the one who is studying. Obviously, the context that he's saying is, and we'll say it again, but he's not speaking necessarily, he's speaking to a senior scholar because the scholarly class actually became a class of people, of those, it became like a solid kind of like a profession in many corners. And so with that came a lot of respect and with that came a lot of you know, position and accolades, nearness to power, even wealth and recognition. And so because of that, there were perhaps a small section of people whose views became compromised, whose intentions became compromised. Imam al-Hazali, who's been at the top of his career, right? You know, basically one of the top scholars, if not the top scholar of the Muslim Ummah in his age. He's seen everything and seen all the different types of people and experienced different things himself. And so when he's talking about action and knowledge for its own sake isn't something you study for its own sake, remember that he's speaking to people who have already studied decades and decades and decades of knowledge, right? It's not like in our time where it's like, you know, you think like, Should I take a class in the Masjid in the Halaqah? And then you stop yourself and you're like, Oh no, But, you know, I don't have to, I can't do my father's iron because I can't study it because my practice is not. So it's important to understand that he's not putting down seeking knowledge at all. Okay, these are big scholars. So no one should feel dissuaded by taking a class or studying knowledge at our level because of the fact that they're or their actions do not coincide with the level of the class because we stand to learn a lot of things still, like we still stand to learn a lot of things. He's speaking to somebody at the end of the path and saying, looking back at it, right? So it's important to understand that he's not at all speaking in an anti-intellectual or anti-clerical manner. And we left off where Imam al-Ghazali is talking about, he mentions Tahajjud, he mentioned Tahajjud And he's talking about how Abdullah Ibn Omar, the Prophet said about him that, you know, what an amazing man. If only he would stand up at night, you know, and so after that, Abdullah Ibn Omar never missed Ahjud, then he stayed up. SubhanAllah, you know, obviously this is easier for some and harder for others. So our homework was, my homework. myself and for anyone who wanted to do it was to try to you know to try to pray in the night even if it's a short amount before the coming in of Fajr for any any amount of time to Hajj as we know is that prayer which you pray after sleep sometime after sleeping after Isha okay so it could even be that you slept for five minutes you know at the beginning of Isha and you wake up and Everything else is considered like you're a hajjit. Otherwise, it's called Qiyamul Layl. If you just pray without sleeping, it's called Qiyamul Layl. Now, the thing is that this itself, of course, it's one of the most beloved things. It's something that, as our teachers tell us, it's something that all the Salah Hindu It's something that all the Salah Hindu. That's what I was told like, is there a righteous person who doesn't pray Tahajjud? Once my Shaykh asked me like, I don't think there is a righteous person who doesn't pray Tahajjud. I was like, Oh, okay. I have a lot to work on. Another time I remember one of my, I was asking advice about like getting up, it's kind of hard and you have work, you're gonna go to sleep late and waking up and it's difficult and as a way of illustrating something, this, my sheikh that I was asking, like, you know, what's your advice on that and stuff like that. He just casually kind of like, you know, he turned to the side to another scholar who was there and he said, hey, so-and-so, when's the last time you missed a hajid? 20 years? And the person was caught off guard and I could see the person go red and they said, yeah, 20 years. And then he said, he stopped and he said, Never. Right, this is one of the scholars. He's just asking casual question, like almost like showing me like, you know, look, and he turned to the side and he said, so I realized that, you know, this is something that in the Muslim world, especially, this is something that is a mark of the Salahin. So Imam Ghazali, why is he talking about this? Why this act? Obviously all actions are important, Tajrid itself isn't also, the one act like that like stamps your wilayah necessarily and you can do anything else you want all the time, you know, it's bad, but oh, you wake up. It doesn't work like that. It's about when someone wants to speak to their spouse privately, you know, speak to their spouse, they do so privately if it's something that is some sort of private speech. And so those people who want to have intimate colloquy with Allah, they do so. in the dark of the night when no one else is there to, number one, to interrupt them. What happens when you get a call and it's an important call, you say, oh, just a second, let me just go somewhere where I can speak to you. And you make sure others don't listen to you, you take off the speaker, yes, okay, give your attention. And when is a time when lovers speak to each other, in the night when there's no one else bothering them. And so when the people of Dunya go towards their beloveds, their spouses in their beds, and the people of Dunya go towards what other hobbies they have, then the one who loves Allah goes towards his beloved. And this is a time when that intimate colloquy takes place. The thing is, it's not necessarily something that's a piece of cake for everyone. It's something we have to work on. This is why it's like homework for each of us. to try to work on. And we have different situations in our lives that may not make it as easy as it is for others or in other parts of the world. One thing I noticed about coming back here is that you tend to stay up early. So you tend to stay up late with all your devices on and everything else. After your work, whatever is done, you stay up late. And then the society starts very early. You're running very, very early. So it's different sometimes than traditional societies, where either everybody sleeps late, but everybody has a late start to their day. So you get sleep after sometime in the day. Or you have like a . like a nap time in Tareem after, you know, after Dhar basically you take a nap so you could, you know, stay up and pray in the night. And the other thing is to remember that Tahajjud isn't something, isn't necessary, people think it's like you're doing like half a khatam or something every night. No, it's about an intention before anything else. It's an intention. It's going to sleep and just tell, even just even putting your alarm to wake up is an intention. and don't don't let go of that as hard as it could be to get up you know nights are getting cold right you're going to want to stay in your warm bed and get a little bit more sleep you know before the day begins but the intention is very important Allah sees intentions and also Allah also sees an attempt sometimes it's not even just about you know what do you do some of the Uliya prayed for a long time some of the Uliya just read Quran some of the Uliya just Some of the pious people just made dhikr of Allah. But the first thing is to show up. It's just to show up, just to be awake in that time. Allah blesses us with the chance to even wake up and use the bathroom. And you don't have wudu and you're not able to, even before you go back to bed, if you have to crawl back to bed, just say something to Allah. There's that hadith about the one who gets up in the middle of the night to answer the call of nature or something else. And, but before they're going back, they just make wudu and they quickly pray something or they ask Allah's forgiveness, that prayer is accepted and Allah will forgive all that person's sins. So that was mentioned by Imam al-Nawi as well. So the other thing that we don't do, right, is while we try, now Imam al-Hazali mentions this as well, not only to show, and as we're gonna see later on in a second, okay, let's get to that part, inshallah, so in the next section, this is, they call this , okay? So, Imam Ghazali begins, Ayyuhalwalad, oh dear child, or oh child. And he says, he starts, he quotes three ayahs of Quran, and each of them are about waking up in the night. He says, Ayuhalwalad, wamila layli fatahajjad bihi na fila talak from Surah Isra. And he said, he said, Amr... So he quotes three ayahs that indicate, that talk about waking up in the night in order to pray. And he said that the first ayah, and I'm gonna, we're gonna put this up in a second. The first ayah... Let's get to that slide inshaAllah, he says, he quotes the first ayah, he says, And a part of the night stand in vigil. He says, This is a divine command. And a part of the night stand in vigil. And then he relates the next ayah. And by the early light, they ask forgiveness. That's another ayah. The people who make istihfar. He said, This is an act of gratitude. And then he says, Those, and then he quotes the other ayah. Right? Al-Mustaqfina bil Ashar, those seeking forgiveness in the early dawn. And he said, this is a remembrance of Allah. So he gives those three ayahs and he says, the first one is a command. The second was an act of gratitude. The third one is zikr. What does he mean? Basically, well, let's look at it from the surface view, the first view. Allah says now to his prophet and from some part of the night, then pray to hajjud as an extra thing for you. that perhaps Allah may send you to an exalted station, the Maqab al-Mahmood. And so he's saying this is a divine command, not only to the Prophet but to all those servants of Allah, the righteous servants of Allah to spend some time to try, at least make an intention and try, right? And the second one is a, and by the early light, meaning before the dawn, they ask forgiveness. Those people, those righteous servants, they're making Istifa. He says, this is an act of gratitude. But gratitude, obviously people, when they wake up in the night and they pray to Allah, one of the feelings that they have there is gratitude towards Allah for the fact that he blessed them with so many things, but also for the fact that Allah even made them wake up. that Allah even got them up to remember. So one of the lessons there is when if Allah lets us wake up to remember him, just say thank you to Allah for that. Just have that appreciation in your heart and Allah will increase you. But as our commentator says, there's another way to look at it. Who is the act of gratitude from? Is it just from the servants, those who are asking forgiveness to Allah? No, it's also from Allah to the servants. Allah is mentioning because Allah is the most appreciative. So it's the same sense in gratitude is you appreciate someone. So Allah now is appreciating those who wake up at that time. And by mentioning and by the early light, they ask forgiveness. Allah is saying that this is an act of gratitude from Allah, recognizing what those people do to show you the level of how Allah sees that. And those seeking forgiveness in the early dawn, that third ayah, Ibn Ghazal said this is a remembrance of Allah. Obviously people who wake up at that time to seek forgiveness, Istighfar is a type of remembrance of Allah. But at the same time, at the same time, the fact that those people are remembering Allah, it's also Allah remembering them. Because anytime that there's a dhikr, an active dhikr in the world or someone making dhikr in the world, this is Allah bringing about his own dhikr in this world and therefore it is Allah making dhikr. of himself right so to show the status of this time to wake up and um that all deeds are important for action for for ilm all amal should be done with ilm however those things which are the most private um they basically are there there's there's a there's a secret inside them Waqalah Rasulullah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam and he continues on this point to And he continues on this point, and he says, that the messenger of Allah said, There are three sounds which Allah, most exalted, loves. Number one, , the sound of the rooster. when it crows and the sound of a of a of a person who is reciting the Quran Allah loves that that that sound and the sound of those people who are making is to far to Allah in the wee hours of the night the early the wee hours of the of the morning you could say just before dawn because why they're not speaking at a volume Like who are these three types of people, right? Number one, the sound of the rooster. First of all, if you've heard a rooster before and you're standing beside her and they suddenly just, it'll kind of startle you a little bit, but what's so symbolic? Why does Allah like that sound? Because that rooster, when it crows, it helps those people who want to remember Allah to wake up, but it itself is making a zikr of Allah, it itself is making a zikr of Allah. Right? And this is why Allah loves, Allah loves the sound of that rooster, because for generations across many cultures, that animal is, was what helped people wake up. And therefore it is Mustahab. When you hear the rooster crows from the Sunnah of the prophet to say, Allahumma in yas alaku in fadlik Allahumma O Allah, I ask you for your virtues. When I was living for two years in the West Indies, just now, before I came here, there were roosters in the neighbor's yard. So for the first time I experienced this idea of like, you know, roosters crowing and stuff like that. Is that what you call it? Crowing, I guess? And you know, cock-a-doodle-doing. And subhanAllah, it was a very interesting experience because I noticed that They don't go off and make their sound. They don't crow right before Fajr. No, no, no, no. They crow sometime around like, probably around like what you would call like 1:00 a.m. It's kind of what we would call the middle of our night. But I realized for the people, the early Muslims who were going to sleep at the first of the night, that would be in like the later part of the night. So I was like, man, that's pretty early. Like you're getting up to Tajr like one o'clock in the morning, just after midnight by a little bit. So this is what even Aisha said, they asked her, when did the Prophet used to pray to hajjat? She said when the sirah used to happen, when the rooster would cry out, the Prophet would wake up. And so that is a beloved sound to Allah and the person who is obviously reciting the Quran and its virtue is obviously not lost on anyone. Because why? Because it is like, it is a muqalima and a suhba with Allah. What is the word? It is like keeping company with Allah. When you're reciting His words, you are keeping company with Him. And why, Imam, the commentator uses the word mukalama. In our time now, a mukalama, do you know what that refers to in modern day Arabic? You call that like a phone call. Like, you know, like when you call somebody on the line and that operator, that automated voice says, you know, like, you know, the person you're trying to reach is on another call. So that's where they use mukalama. It's a call. And so it really does tell you something though. It's when you recite the Quran, it's like you're on a call with Allah . It's like you're on a call with him, that's a very intimate thing to be on a call with somebody. Right? It's a very close thing. May Allah give us tawfik to read more Quran, inshAllah. And the sound of those people who are in the night asking for forgiveness, right? Because the thing is, when you speak to someone right now, we're speaking in bold, loud voices to be heard, to be understood. But someone who, how do they speak to someone, their beloved in the night for those who are married? You know, how do you speak to somebody who, your spouse in the night with whispers in you know, enduring terms in words that other people don't get to hear from you, with jokes, with honest emotions, raw emotions. Perhaps, you know, the people who are making Istifa at that time of night, groveling to Allah in tears, asking Allah to forgive them for the way that they are, for the things that they did wrong, for the things that they couldn't do, for the things that Allah deserves for them. Allah deserves from them, but they simply couldn't muster the strength to bring it up. So this is a very special sound to Allah for this reason. And because it's time when, why is Imam Ghazali talking about this? Because it's a time when the busyness of the day is not there. You know, even when you wake up in the morning before your day starts, it's such a nice time. Before you open up, I mean, SubhanAllah, now the phone has kind of ruined everything, changed everything. But before you open up your laptop, before you log into work, before you open the radio on your way to drop the kids to school, whatever it is you're doing, it's that quiet in your mind. But when that happens before Fajr even, there's a special emptiness in your brain and the fullness of the heart where the busyness of the world and all of the things in your bustling day are not there to distract you. And so the that comes into our hearts, the thoughts are not there. the random stupid thoughts, nasty thoughts sometimes that float through our mind are not there. And so that's the time when that channel, when the line between us and Allah is the most clear, right? Without the Wasawis of Shaitaan. And it is said that, Waqala Sufyan Al-Thori, then Imam Al-Ghazali goes on to quote Sufyan Al-Thori, the great contemporary Imam Abu Hanifa, great early Tabiyi scholar whom Imam Ahmed bid Humbal said that he felt that the best person of that generation was Sufyan Al-Thawri , the great scholar who had his own madhhab, mujtahid scholar, but his madhhab didn't survive to our time. And he quotes him as saying, In Allah ta'ala khalaka rihan tahubbu waqt al-ashari, taqmilu al-Athqar al-Stighfar il al-Malik al-Jalil Jabbar. That verily Allah most exalted created a breeze, a gentle breeze which blows in the times of the wee hours of the morning, right at the end of the night, that carries the adhkar and the istikhar and the remembrances and the entreaties of forgiveness to the majestic and the all-powerful King Allah so it's like this breeze comes over the land and carries all of the adhkar those adhkar are taken up to the angels and to to the to the court of Allah and so he's what he's saying is that's the time when the court of the king is open right when do you go to a government office when it's open of course When do you go to ask, when you ask a very important person for a favor, you wait till they're free. And when they give you your time and say, okay, you got me in my office. What do you want to ask for? That's when you let your requests out. That's when you bring out what's inside your heart. So Imam al-Ghazali is trying to emphasize that this is a time when Allah , I mean, subhanAllah, how Allah says He comes down to the nearest heaven, obviously transcendently and exalted be he, you know, not in a literal anthropomorphic fashion, but the point is, don't miss the point of what he's saying. Allah says he comes down to the nearest heaven, the nearest sky. And so Allah is so in that sense, his attention and his rahma is so close. And so, you know, Ghazali is saying take advantage of that time to his student. And he said, and he also said, he said, When the first part of the night comes, a caller cries out from under the divine throne of Allah . Lo, or like he's calling out to attention and a crier cries out, let all of those worshipers, let those who are worshipers arise at the first part of the night. And so those who are the worshipers, the Abidoon, the Abidin, they stand up at that first part of the night and they pray for however much Allah allows them to, right? However much Allah allows them to. And then, and then ... Then at half the night, a caller cries out ... low attention let those who are the devotees of Allah the true devotees of Allah let them stand up now and so they stand up those who are the devotees of Allah they stand up and they pray until the morning time and when it comes the time for the pre-dawn time then a crier cries out from under the throne of Allah behold low let those who seek forgiveness let them now rise and those who seek forgiveness from Allah they get up and they ask Allah forgive us forgive us for what we've done and the reason why he mentions these things because in from the first of the night those who are the true worshipers of Allah why do they get up because the rest and the relief and comfort they experience in standing up in front of Allah is more than the comfort than they experience even from inside their own beds which for us you know Allah says and their sides doesn't touch the it doesn't touch the edge of their bed meaning they don't lie they're not lying down when everyone else goes to lie down the lights are off doors closed see you later everyone else hits the sack and these people their sides don't know this the edges of their bed right this is the people Allah is talking about why because they're experiencing more ecstasy and more joy than the people of desires are feeling when they indulge in their desires. And this is what the spiritual masters tell us. Things that we, wow, when we hear about this, we think, wow, that's amazing. May Allah make us experience and feel these things and guide us towards the ways to understand what the spiritual masters are talking about even if we don't know exactly what that's like. But it is imagined that there are people who experience an ecstasy so much that the people who are indulging in their desires would not be able to even come close to that feeling that same feeling this is what brings them back and back and back and then there was some of them said if there was any such thing as the pleasures of paradise possible to be felt in this world then it would belong to the sweetness it would be in the sweetness of the people of intimate discourse in the dead of the night those people come closest to understanding what it is but in order to feel that and understand that we have to be first of those who do that who stay up at that time and in order to be amongst those people then we have to at least aspire to be among those people And if we, before we even aspire to be among those people, we have to intend to be among those people and to hear the words that inspire us to do that. So inshallah, may Allah wherever we are on that track, may Allah take us to the next step and the next step and the next journey. And subhanAllah, and then Allah , yes subhanAllah, then Allah, he mentions, the commentator mentions one of the great saints of the past, Ibn Bakr, who says for 40 years, he mentions, nothing has made me sad except the coming of the dawn, except the rising of the dawn. Because the one thing that makes a lover disheartens them when they're in the company of their beloved is when they have to, when their intimate time together has to come to an end. I need to plug my my my thing sorry I just need to plug in my my computer before apologize sorry about that yeah because the the one thing that a person who when they're with their beloved the one thing they don't want to happen is the time the time of parting to come. They don't want that time to come, right? That's the time you feel sad because you have to part from your beloved. And then Thumma Yunadi, then, and also the commentator, our commentator brings an interesting point summarizing from Imam Al-Ghazali's. Other works about the seven levels of Tahajjud, right? This is not from the main text, but he just just to summarize it very quickly to show you, where are we in this seven levels? May Allah, you know, give us Tawfiq. The first level he says is... staying up for the entire night. That's the highest level of that, or it's not even the highest level, he says. He says that is staying up the entire night, right? And this is for the people who experience a sweetness and a joy in their intimate discourse with Allah so that it becomes like a type of nourishment for them. The way that we sleep to charge our batteries, they stay up in the night to charge a different type of battery. or for them that becomes their that becomes the nourishment that they seek the way that we seek food right and they they rather prefer to sleep to sleep in the daytime when when everyone else is busy with their dunya they would they prefer to sleep through sleep in the morning perhaps or sometime in the day to do that and that's obviously not a very easy thing but some of the people from the early Muslims of the Salaf al-Salihun they used to do that right in fact there were people who would pray fajr with the wudu of isha as we know right that was also attributed to Imam Abu Hanifa and the second time second type of tahajjud that they talk about the Qiyamul layl is standing from half the night so stand so but what's the way to do this it is mentioned it's not about waking up in the middle of the night and then staying up for half of it rather rather it is said to stay to sleep for one third of the night right and then wake up at the third of the night and then sleep for the last sixth of the night. Okay. So to give an example, right? If you have like a nine hour night, let's say our, let's say our night is like from 8 p.m. Isha until like 5 a.m. Fajr, let's say that's nine hours. So sleep the first three hours, you know, from 8 to 11, then you wake up until from 11 and then until 3 30. 30 until Fajr, right? So that was an example of those who sleep half the night. Why is it that they sleep again? They recommended that after the Tahajjud to sleep so that it wards off like drowsiness during the day. Because if someone wakes up really early, well, I would say like wakes up for Tahajjud and they don't sleep after Fajr at all, and they just stay up, you know, after Dhuhar, after Asr, even mid-morning, what's gonna start happening? That's what's gonna happen, right? Unless you have your coffee, you know, and then someone's talking to you and it's just like, you know, like, so subhanAllah, sometimes you can tell the people who, WashaAllah, you know, you're talking to them and all of a sudden they're just like, yeah. It's like what? Oh yeah, yeah. So, you know, so that's why you get that little bit of sleep before the tahajjud and also so that your prayer is in the jofalayl, it's in the belly of the night, the middle of the night. Right? So that it's in the middle of the night because, you know, it's easier actually to combine your tahajjud with your fajr because you know, you have to wake up for fajr. So you just wake up a little earlier. There's nothing wrong with that now. So the best way to start with tahajjud is just to wake up even five minutes before fajr comes in, even five minutes and pray to intend to and then wake up and even do that and just make a quick dua if you can. And a person, even a lady on her period, for example, can wake up before fajr if she wishes to speak to Allah at that time. Even if there's no prayer at that time, you can still speak to Allah at that time and get the virtue of that. And then he mentions those who wake up, the third levels, those who wake up for a third of the night. And he mentions how that is done. And the Prophet used to, it was narrated that he used to pray his witr in the last part of the night. right at that time. And then he would go right back to sleep. And then if there was any need that he had from his families, from his wives, that would be fulfilled. And then lie down right on his place of prayer until Bilal who used to come and wake him up for Fajr. So praying to Hajj in the last part of the night and then lying down and then right where you pray so you don't sleep too deeply. And he also mentioned that sleep at this time, like praying and then sleeping right before you pray fajr, that that is a time, sleeping at that time is a cause of spiritual unveilings and of witnessing and seeing things, perhaps also good dreams and things like that after a session of worship with Allah that people who have a heartfelt connection to Allah, that they find that those things come to them, and it also helps when you get that little bit of sleep to do other types of worship after Fajr, such as your wird, your dhikr, your Quran, things like this. And they mentioned this is also the type of tahajjud that Dawud used to pray. So this is a prophetic type of tahajjud. And the fourth he says is standing up for a sixth of the night or a fifth of the night, right? And the fifth type is not even measuring how much you're waking up. It's basically to pray as much as you want and then when you get tired, sleep. And when you wake up again, when you happen to wake up, pray and sleep again. And so this is also the way that the Prophet also did this. You know, without timing a specific amount of time, pray for as long as you want. And then when you're tired, you lie down, go to sleep, and then wake up again and go back to sleep. But you know, subhanAllah, you have to have a living heart. You know, we need like our phones and our alarm clocks. Remember, this is a time before phones and before alarm clocks. Not only just the trick that the Messiah say, like drink a glass of water before you go to bed and you'll wake up in the middle of the night, drink two glasses of water. But it's also about their hearts are so attuned. Like when you have a plane to catch the next morning of a flight, you rarely sleep through the flight or you have an exam, you're just up because your heart wants to be up. It's looking for, it's tense. And so it's going to sleep. You know, we should try this, going to sleep with that urgency in our hearts, telling ourselves, okay, you know, and just making a mental note that this is an urgency. Sometimes you may even wake up before your alarm goes off because your body clock has already woken you up. And then the sixth type is just waking up so that you can pray enough for two to four rakas and make wudu and just sit in one place facing the qibla for a moment. and just busy yourself with a little bit of dhikr or dua just to say that you are included in those people who pray to hajjut. So out of all those six types, the sixth type out of the seven is just someone who wakes up a little bit and manages to get something in there. especially for those of us who are busy, their day is very busy, it's very difficult, they need their time, just to wake up a little bit and do that. And then the seventh type, subhanAllah, he doesn't even mention it. Because what do you think the seventh type is? The seventh type, the person who does not wake up at all. But he doesn't need to mention that. Then he goes on to say, And continuing from the previous thing, and when Fajr rises, when the sun starts to, when the Fajr comes up, the dawn breaks, then a caller calls out, Lo, let the heedless people rise. And then they rise to pray Fajr like the dead rise from their graves, right? They rise from their beds like the dead rise from their graves. So they, in that time, they would say, look, Fajr is something that's far, like everybody's got to do it. So they would consider those who wake up to pray Fajr among those people who are Heedless, right? Like you're just waking up for what you really have to do anyways. And there's subhanAllah, look at the point that they're saying. It's like saying someone expecting some sort of reward for getting up and going to work or getting up and getting your kid dressed for school. I mean, it's like, do you want a prize for that? That's what you have to do. So subhanAllah, we have to remember where our priorities are as well. And Imams and they also mentioned that the reason why we get lazy and we are not able to wake up for Tahajjud and to wake up to pray to Allah is because of our sins. Because of our sins. We have to ask Allah what did we see? What did we allow into our hearts? What did we say? What did we do? And what do we even think that Allah took this away from us or we missed it? In fact, someone who even misses it once As one of our very pious people that we see Abu Munir back in Jordan, he used to say, even if a person misses it once and they're praying it all the time, but they miss it once, it's something that they did that made them miss it. They have to look and think about that. May Allah give us tawfiq to do what the ulama and the uliya say. And so if you had authority says, he says, I was deprived of seven months, right? seven months of standing up to like first of his act of worship because of a sin, a single sin that I committed. And it was said to him, what was that sin? And he said, I looked at a man who was crying in dua and I said in myself, he's showing off. He looked in his mind, he just said, show off because he was crying in dua to Allah. And he says he had enough spiritual intuition, sufihan authori. He said for seven months I couldn't do a certain act of worship that I used to do. So if this is what comes out of the heart of such a huge scholar and may Allah forgive us, you know, may Allah guide us. It's just good to hear the stories. of our pious predecessors and our awliya and our ulama. Why? Because we shouldn't be comparing to our better selves or each other. We should be comparing to these lofty characters. Compare yourself to the ambiya, to the awliya, to the ulama. Compare yourself to what Imam Ghazali is saying and realize that we fall short, not in order to feel depressed or down. No, just in order to set your aspirations somewhere, to aim for the top, aim for the best. Right? Because complacency comes about when we start to settle for less, especially when we say to ourselves, I'm good enough as I am. Such a person will never ever get better if we just say, oh, I accept myself and I don't really care. That person is not on a spiritual path to be sure. That person is not on a spiritual path. Because a person on a spiritual path wants to make themselves more beloved to the one that they love, to their beloved, right? And then there are a number of ayahs that they mentioned as well about waking up in the night. And it is mentioned, Imam Ghazali continues and he talks about now, he says, . He starts another section. He says, . It is narrated in the advices or the words of wisdom and the injunctions of Luqman the wise we as we know Luqman was mentioned in the Quran right there's a whole you know chapter and he is there was a disagreement among the Ulama was he a prophet or was he a a very you know a saintly worshiper of Allah and a very wise a wise human being so there's a difference of opinion whether he was that or not but one thing we do know is that Allah immortalized him by mentioning him by name in the Quran, mentioning his wisdom, mentioning his advices that he gave to his son in the Quran, Alhamdulillah. And when they say the wise, Imam al Ghazali brings this here because he's trying to say what is real wisdom, right? What is wisdom? Look, man is the wise. People used to think, especially in Imam al Ghazali's time because they had the intellectual and philosophical tradition in the Muslim world was booming at the time of Imam al Ghazali. It was booming and much of it was good, but much of it was also a little bit off of the Orthodox path of Islam, right? In some of their ideas. And so he's trying to bring this idea that the hakeem, the wise person is not the one who spends their time in worldly philosophies and deviant ideas, but rather a person who is a person of wisdom, an alem of wisdom, right? Is a person who has perfected the human ego by taking borrowing light from the knowledges, right? The knowledges of the Dean and earned for themselves an ability, a mastery, a complete mastery over the performance of virtuous deeds to the best of their ability. This is wisdom. Someone who has learned to master their own ego through the benefit of knowledge, and has been able to earn a mastery for themselves to do overdoing good deeds to the best of their ability. This is wise. So what this tells you is that you don't have to be a scholar to be Hakim, a wise person. The summary, as my teacher told me, the summary of wisdom is living a good life in all of its meanings. It is to live a good life, someone who is wise lives well. in all aspects of their life, if you notice. And he says, so look man. in some of his injunctions to his son said, Oh my son, . Why does he start with that? Imam Ghazali brings that because he's also referring to his student as . So he's trying to say, this is how you give advice to someone. And this is also why a father and a parent should always be giving these types of advices to their children. When's the last time we told our children these things? Right? That the rooster, oh my son, is more intelligent than you are. it calls out while you are sleeping. So subhanAllah, he's saying that this rooster is more intelligent than you. It is awake and calling out. Right? And what we do know is that when the animals and all the creation of Allah, they make test be of Allah . Yusabihuli lahi mafi sama wa ti uma fil ard right surah al-jumua that everything in the heavens and the earth makes tasbiha to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala and ... There is nothing except that it makes glorifies the praises of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala however ... But you do not understand you cannot comprehend the tasbiha So everything is making a tasbih to Allah , whether it's a verbal tasbih, whether it's verbally glorifying Allah, or whether as some of the spiritual scholars say, it's a tasbih wujudi. It's an intrinsic glorification of Allah by their very existence. So by the existence of the tree, it itself just existing is glorifying Allah. By the duck quacking and the birds flying and the ant crawling, it's by its very existence, it glorifies Allah. That is its tasbih, but also the animals have their own tongue to make tasbih. And then he quotes, a line of poetry or two lines of poetry and he said how beautiful and it is whoever said this poetry Imam al-Ghazali is saying did really well and he quotes this ................ Akhabtu wabaytullahi laukuntu aashiqan lamaa sabaqatni bilbuka'i hama'il haima'imu waz amu anni haimun zhu sababatin li Rabbi wala'abki watabkil baha'imu so subhanAllah he mentions this very beautiful okay I'll share that the translation of that poem I'll try to render it poetically we'll get to that in a second it just came I just put it a little bit later Basically what he's saying is that there was a dove that was crying in the dark of the night while I was sleeping. While I was sleeping. And it was making this noise on a branch. It was standing on a branch. And then he says, I'm a liar, I've lied. And he swears by the house of Allah. But as a commentator says, it means the Lord of the house of Allah because it is not permissible to swear on anything except for Allah. So he can't say by the Kaaba, but he still says it. Poets, what they say has to be interpreted in a way, generous, a charitable interpretation. And so he says, so by the Lord of the house of Allah, he says, I lied because if I was truly someone in passionate love with Allah , then this bird would not have preceded me. to crying. He says, while I claim that I am lost in my passion and in my yearning for Allah and for my Lord, I don't even cry while even a beast is crying at this time of night, right? Well, I'll share later on how he rendered it and you guys can judge if it's accurate. So what he's saying is that he's saying that how could I claim to love Allah? And even the animals are up at that time glorifying Allah. Even animals who are not typically up at that time are glorifying Allah. And so all it is, is he's not saying that, okay, once an animal makes a noise, we can't sleep, we should be up. What he's trying to say is it reminds him, 'cause he was sleeping. So it reminds him that you should be up also making, crying to Allah . And then Imam Al-Zali continues and he says, , oh dear, child right now he says the summary of knowledge right the summary of knowledge he says is that you know what obedience and worship really are and this is the summary of the whole work like if you had to like highlight one line it's this right If you just didn't know anything else, the entire Khulasa, the Khulasa is the summary of all knowledge is that you know what obedience and worship really are. Everything you learn is there to show us this point and everything we do is there to actualize this point. to learn how to actualize it and then to show Allah that we really want to do it is our obedience and our worship to Him, right? And then Imam Al-Ghazali is saying, and not only to know what it is, like the definition of it. In fact, I'm not even gonna share the definition of it. It's not about the definition. Everybody, all of us will all write down the definition, but it's to understand its reality. Understand its reality. And then it's almost as though Imam Al-Ghazali is implying. It is enough for you to get the amount of knowledge that you need to understand these two things. And after that, you are not expected to start studying more and more and more and more. It's interesting because he's a great scholar who studied more and more and more than anybody else since him, since his time, perhaps. And yet he's turning our attention towards this idea that it's not about this studying a whole bunch of knowledge, taking a whole bunch of courses, it's not about that. it's about understanding these two points and when you've understood them in all aspects of your life you're that's enough that's what you need to know and everything else is icing on the cake after that right and that when you understand the secrets and the finer subtleties of worship and obedience to Allah this is true knowledge that this is true knowledge right and it is about learning in order to obey Allah and so and it is basically what he's implying here is whenever you learn something, you should be leaning on the side of not the fact, but on the implementation of that. And you can clearly see he comes across not as a compiler of knowledge, but as someone who acts on it. This is what he's trying to impart after a lifetime of Ilm to his student after having compiled more knowledge through memory than anyone else in his time. Right. And however, it is while recognizing that there must be some people who lean towards seeking compiling knowledge. He's not saying no one should do it. There are people in this world. We need them scholars who will go and just go to the ends of the earth for every last point of knowledge. It doesn't mean that we stop and in our time. Okay. Remember, lest. What we're reading make us think that we're, oh, you don't have to seek knowledge that much. I know I'm obeying Allah and that's it. No, he's not speaking to the likes of us. He's speaking to the people who've already studied Deen and he's saying, come back, but we're at the point where we need to come up to seek knowledge, right? So it's something that we should remember, but we do it with this view. And then he continues and he says, . And he says, No. He says know that obedience and worship are to follow the lawgivers commands and prohibitions, Allah's commands and prohibitions in speech and deed in accordance with the sacred law. Because then somebody will say, okay, knowledge and worship, no problem. I'll study, you know, I'll study something, whatever I like. And I'll do whatever I think Allah, whatever I think I should do to Allah. And he say, no, it's not just about anything. It's about following Allah's commands and prohibitions in speech and deeds. So doing and saying what he said and not doing and not saying what he said not to do in accordance with the Sharia. And in other words, if the act that we do is not in accordance with the sacred law of Allah , then we are sinners. So we could think that we're doing something very good. And unfortunately, you see a lot of people doing this. They think that they're doing a good act. In reality, in reality, what are you doing? Where did the dean say to do this? Where did the dean say to do this? And they're going against the tenants of the sacred law because it makes them feel good. you know oh we're gonna do like you know a charity fashion show you know where we're gonna you know do all kinds of things that people who of the dunya do and and and basically try to superimpose you know the ways of people of dunya and call that something that isn't ibadah for Allah in such a way I should make it make it clear you can have a great fashion show Islamic fashion show you know if there's modesty and there's this and that what I mean is they do something in such a way that they think they're doing something good and in reality they're disobeying Allah right so it has to have the elements obviously of something that sacred law does not does not allow and then he says and then he says just like as if you fasted on the day of Eid and the days of tashriq after the Hajj you would be a sinner Like you can't come and say, you know, oh, I'm so pious that when on Eid, when everyone else is eating, I'm going to be fasting. In fact, that day is the day of hospitality from Allah. No one's allowed to fast on that day. It's Haram to fast on that day. Or you prayed in a stolen garment. Even though the outward of what you're doing is ibada, okay? But you're sinning by doing that. So you can't do this thing where, I don't know, okay, some type of activism, let's say, and you've just broken into somewhere, torched cars and stuff like that, and now you've broken into a shopping mall because it's against capitalism, and now you're gonna make a big prayer inside this shopping mall that you broke into or you stole some clothes or something and you're putting it on, and you're gonna now pray in stolen clothing. He's saying that this is not following the sacred law, and it's interesting, because you might be wondering, well, who really fasts on Eid and our time it's hard enough to get people you know like fasting on a normal day these days it's like you know so that type of disobedience you don't really see people trying to go beyond in worship right but there are some types of groups that do this number one those people who are very lax very lax in their approach to the Sharia and do not follow orthodoxy at all there a lot of the times you see this idea of dressing up a sin as if it is an act of worship. Trying to say that you're doing something for Allah through disobedience of Allah. The other group that you see are extremists, what you would might call radicals, fundamentalists that go on the complete opposite way, right? And say that this act that we're doing, whether it's violence on innocent people, on Muslims, beating people in public for how they're dressing for a small fault of theirs. You know, something like that. It's thinking that we are now doing something pious for Allah, but you're not following the Sharia in doing it, even though outwardly it looks like you're upholding the sacred law, you know, or you're trying to reenact something in the classical books of fiqh, complete misapplication, but outwardly it looks like you're doing that. So this is why this is not valid. And the third group are those who innovate in the deen of Allah . those people who introduce a new practice that is not according to the tenants of the Sharia. And this is where you'll see that happening most often. And then he continues, Imam Ghazali continues. Oh, by the way, this is the poem, okay. In the dead of the night, a dove was weeping atop a branch while I was sleeping. I've lied by God's house for if I was in love, I would not be outraced to weep by a dove. I claim longing and love for my Lord, yet I lie while I do not weep, even animals cry. So this is what I hope captured a little bit of the inshaAllah. And ... Iwan Ghazali continues, he says, Oh beloved child, oh dear child, oh beloved son. So it is befitting that your deeds and your words and your deeds are in accordance with the sacred law because knowledge and action, knowledge and action without following the sacred law are misguidance. Right? Knowledge and action without following the sacred law are misguidance. It's a strong statement subhanAllah. And he says then it is befitting, it is proper and make sure that you are not deceived by the ecstatic statements and utterances of the Sufis, right? Because walking on this path, treading this spiritual path, and traversing a spiritual path, it only happens by mujahida of the nafs, of struggling against one's desires. And by cutting off the desires of the ego and the lower self. And to slay It's follies, it's stubborn follies of the nafs and the ego with the sword of spiritual rigors and practices. Let's step back for a second. SubhanAllah, many people will be surprised. Wait, did Imam Ghazali just say something against the Sufis? You know, this is actually a kind of a refutation for those people who, because of their prejudices, because of words and labels will rule out Imam Ghazali, Imam Ghazali is a Sufi. Clearly here, he's saying something that is differentiating. What does he mean by what he's saying? What does he mean by what he's saying? He's not saying all people who ascribe themselves to this path or this label are doing that. He's saying sometimes some words may come out of those people who are in a spiritual state, which are considered ecstatic utterances. Things that they're saying from a spiritual experience, however, that don't make sense outwardly. or that if followed or taken literally would not be in accordance with what is befitting to follow and where's the proof of this where's the proof this actually comes in the Hadith so it's not that he's not saying that they're wrong to do that or he's not saying that he's condemning them to do that no at the same time he's also for those people he's not also saying you know basically saying that we don't accept any like goofy Sufi stuff basically is what he's saying stay on the path of the Sharia the Tasawwaf or Tatazkiya and Sharia and the path of orthodox Islam are one in the same. And this is exactly what Imam al-Ghazali did in his time with Ihya al-Muddin was there's a group of people who are focused on the spiritual path and the cleansing of the heart and trying to reach Allah and there are some group of people who rejected that completely and said no we're gonna stick to our outward sciences and Imam al-Ghazali is making a synthesis between the two and he's saying as well Where's the proof, by the way? Sometimes an ecstatic utterance can come from someone who's in a state of great spiritual elation or the opposite. In the Hadith, doesn't it come? In the Sahih Hadith, where the Prophet said that Allah is more overjoyed by the tawbah of a servant, by the repentance of a servant, than a man who goes on a journey in the desert and loses his camel and in the middle of a desert. And so he resigns himself to death because you're in the middle of a desert. And so he lies down, he despairs 'cause he's lost his camel in the middle of a desert, you're gonna die of thirst. So he lies down under a tree and in his despair falls off to sleep in the heat. And he's woken by the bell of the camel and he wakes up and the camel's grazing on the same tree that he laid down to die under. And he realized he found his camel, so he jumps up, grabs the camel's reins and said, Thank you, Lord. He says, I am your Lord and you are my servant. He says to Allah. And then the Prophet says, he mixed up the words out of extreme joy to Allah . It could be a mistake, it just comes out like that because of the feeling or it could be something that is understood by that person but it's not understood by us, so anyways, that's a side point, but the point is Imam Al Ghazali is saying that don't get caught up in just looking at the utterances that people don't understand and trying to say that you have some secret knowledge now. No, there's no way in the spiritual path to avoid working on your nafs, struggling against it. In fact, he's saying that this is the jihad al-Akbar. as we know from the hadith, that this is the greatest jihad is to struggle against one's desires and one's nafs. And anybody who says, as he's saying that you can reach spiritual heights or reach Allah's good pleasure by not working on yourself and working against you, 'cause we all have lower qualities. We all have these desires in us. We all have these faults and our follies and it takes work. And anyone who says that they simply are spiritually like reached at a high level, without any sort of work on themselves is fooling themselves. So he's saying, but don't get misled by relying on those things and not, but you notice he doesn't say, put down anyone, the figures that he's speaking about as well. And then he says, and then he continues and says, walabi tamat, wat tarahat, a sufiyah. And so he's saying as he And he's saying that, And so do not be misled by the ecstatic utterances and the, how do you say it? Yeah, the abstruse expressions, the abstruse expressions. And then he says, And know, wa'alam, anna lisan al-mutlaq. And then he says that, know that a loose tongue with a closed heart filled with distraction and desire is a sign of eternal damnation. He says, It's a sign of eternal damnation. Right? When you're just saying whatever you want, and that person just saying anything that comes to them, yet their heart is closed, and just completely distracted from Allah and desires. When you see a person, this is actually a sign of that. And so, save yourself from that. ... and it is a proof of it. ... to the point where your nafs your ego will not be slain your desires will not be slain except through um he says to the point where if you do not if you are not slain through sincere ... through sincerely working on yourself and struggling against yourself learn to ... you will not be brought to life unless you stay yourself through sincere struggling against your ego you will not be brought to life by the lights of experiential closeness with Allah . He says, the knowing, the knowing of Allah directly and experientially. Right now he's talking about this and the commentator mentions that the best way to go on that path is to limit first your food and your drink to what you need, your food and your drink. He says why because from the stomach outpours all of the other desires the commentator says And then from this, from the stomach and the other desires, then it goes to the private part. And then when desires there fill up, then it goes to the desire for wealth. And when it goes to there, then it goes to the desire from wealth. When it gets too much, then it goes to the desire for glory. And then glory Jah and mal, wealth are those two things which bring all kinds of other calamities, such as pride and showing off and envy and enmity with each other, right? And this is why the Prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam he emphasized the idea of hunger, the idea of fasting. It doesn't mean necessarily fasting. It means not being satiated all the time, not being always full, not necessarily getting feeling yourself every chance you get or getting the best of what you want all the time. It's about holding back a little bit. As our teacher said, the hardest action for the hardest exercise that for a person in our time is just to push themselves away from their table once they've gotten full, right? It's very difficult when you're served a scrumptious meal to just leave a quarter of it or leave a 10% of it, just leave a little bit, leave a bite of it. You got this awesome cheesecake or whatever you like, you know, and you know, you want to polish it off. But it's that last little bit, practice giving it to someone else. Just like, here, take it to someone else. You start on this idea of coming away from it slowly. But that doesn't mean you take away your needs as well, right? And Aisha is attributed to Aisha that she said, keep knocking on the door of Jannah and it will open to you. And then someone asked, how do you knock on the door of Jannah? They said, by hunger and thirst, meaning not always satisfying yourselves. And just imagine in that time, they had only dates and goat milk and camel milk. So imagine for our time when we walk into the supermarket and there's literally like every single thing. One thing I'm surprised about since coming back, I'm like, wow, I never knew that a supermarket could like literally have everything you could think of. you know, or like at every corner, like, you know, a Starbucks or tim horton's or whatever, you know, type of coffee shop that you have. It's literally like in your face everywhere you go, you know? And then, and he also, the commentator also mentions when they talk about the ecstatic utterances of the Sufis or the people who ascribe themselves, they're talking about those things which have no basis or foundation that you can trace back to the the the Sharia and the Deen right and then he says then he continues and the last part we'll speak about he says well let me just find where we are this is the last part and this is a very interesting part that he gets to right now he's going he's been talking about knowledge and actions for a long time right now he's gonna finish on another point And he says, And no, ... Just know that some of the questions that you asked me about in this letter, oh my dear child, my student, some of the questions that you asked me in this letter, ... There's no way that they're not fit to be answered through writing and through speech. But you have to reach that spiritual level then you'll know what it is because otherwise if you don't reach to that level right that those are things that are impossible to convey so he says know that there are some issues that cannot be explained through writing and speech when you reach that state you will know what they are but it's impossible to learn them It's impossible to learn them through rote learning because they are experiential, right? He's saying that ... ... ... because it is experiential knowledge you're asking about. Dhouqi means to taste some Dhouq is to taste. What it really means is that you have to taste. The answer, I can't answer you, I just can't, because words don't allow me to do it. He says everything that is to be tasted, that you need to taste, it's impossible to describe through words and through writing. Just like , just like the sweetness of something that's sweet, like honey. How do you describe? Tell me what chocolate tastes like. Tell me what honey tastes like. Just describe it in words, but define it. You'll say, how can I write that? Because it's experiential. And the bitterness of something that is bitter, like vinegar. How do you describe that? Right? It cannot be known except through tasting. Now listen to this example. Okay, I'll try to frame this as, just like it is said, it was said. Kaifa takoon fakataba fi jawabihi ya foolan inni kuntu ilaan hasibtuka aninan fakat wal an araf tuka anna ka anin anin wa ahmaq ya nahadhil levtha thouqiya intasila intasil taarif wa ila la yastaqim wasfahabil kawwal kitaba okay okay because there are yeah different ages in the room I'll translate like this he's saying It was said that there was an impotent man who had never experienced those pleasures. An impotent man wrote to his friend and said, Tell me what the pleasure of sexual intercourse feels like. And so he wrote a letter, Tell me what this feels like. And so his friend wrote back to him, wrote back a letter to him, said, Oh, so-and-so, up until this point, I used to know about you, my friend, that you are impotent, that you've never felt those things. But I used to think that was it. But now I realize that not only are you impotent, but you're also foolish because these types of pleasures are to be tasted and experienced. And when you reach that, then you will understand, you will know. And other than that, then its description cannot be contained through speech and through words. And so what does the commentator say at this point? Why does Imam Ghazali bring this? He's trying to say to his student, Oh student, the thing that you're asking me about, apply yourself to the path of Allah and you will understand the answer. It will come to you. So not everything, because the thing that happens is people who are, as a spiritual master say, you know, as I've heard from them, is that someone who is into studying a lot, sometimes they feel like all the answers will come from the book as well. So they become so attached to the idea that knowledge is in books, knowledge is written, knowledge is memorized, I can learn it, that they don't realize that there are other types of knowledge. And they become ignorant of this. And they start to say, well, where is that written? Where is that written? And that's why he's saying, that's why the kind of questions you're asking me on paper, you're asking me on paper because you haven't reached the idea that it's experiential. So he brings other examples. So what he's trying to say is that the sweetness and the pleasure of this act that I'm talking about, more than that is the pleasure. and the sweetness of reaching Allah more than that but one has to get there to understand right and also he's also he also implying as the commentator says that there is a remembrance of Allah in the sweetness of the pleasures that we have as well if we knew he says and so so understand what I'm saying understand what I'm saying So may Allah cause us to understand these things, inshallah, and to take the guidances and walk on the path of the spiritual masters and the ulema and our guides, inshallah. Are there any questions? Yes. This might be an awesome question, but how much has mental health and social economic Okay, so the question was, if I understood it correctly, it's how much does the issue of like, are you talking about now or before? Okay, how much does the differences between Sufi and Salafi groups, how much of that difference is impacted by mental health and socioeconomic factors? That's a big topic. I don't want to venture into speculating on anyone's mental health or ascribing socioeconomic you know, especially beyond the record for, you know, trying to make those kind of judgments. So I had to be very careful. What I would say is, um, and also not try to judge anyone who tries to do something the best they can for the sake of Allah, according to the intelligence and according to the situation and the background and the experiences and the disposition that Allah has put them in, Allah has created them in, but there's no doubt at least from what I've seen from a cursory level, that the environment that you grow up in and the influences that you have around you and your personality type does impact the groups that you gravitate towards within Islam, right? Just like you gravitate towards different types of friends, you're generally going to gravitate towards the group that expresses your desired or personality traits that you look up to in the way that you think are best expressed. So generally, you know, yeah, you do see this stereotype, but it is there generally speaking, you know, like in some ways, but I don't want to tie that to socioeconomic, like class issues. Just because I, you know, I don't want to judge anybody, you know, like there is the trope of like, you know, the working class versus like the elite you know, kind of like social class issues about why people go towards this or that. And elitism should not be there and looking down on anyone should not be there. Educational factors like worldly education, maybe those have things to do with it. There's a lot I could probably speculate, but I think just to say stay safe, I think we should say that it should not cause us to disrespect anyone who's on a sincere journey to Allah , whether they call themselves Sufi or Salafi or Tablighi or Ikhwani or Barilvi or Dibandi or whatever it is. Everyone who's sincerely seeking Allah will be guided to Allah in the way that perhaps guidance can reach them at that time. There are many people who need a certain group to tell them about the basics of Islam. and that's the only way they could have known it at that time they just would not have gelled in another in another group or situation and then it's up to them if Allah decides to guide them on or if they decide to open their hearts towards seeking more whether they see through the limitations of the of the things that they that were told to them as their group and see Islam and it's in a wider all-encompassing sense so I hope that kind of gives a little bit of what I'm trying to say. Alono's best, yeah. so actually, yeah, that's a good point. So he's talking about slaying the enoughs, but You know, when you're fighting a giant, right? You don't just go head on. It's not the way to do it, right? It's through strategy and tactic, right? In the same way our nafs is like sometimes bigger than a giant, you know? And the way that the Ulama advise, at least my teachers have advised, is you use diplomacy in the sense of, you know, because if you try to wrestle someone who's bigger than you, they'll throw you down. Even if you get a hold of the ankle or something, you're in trouble. And then when you get thrown down by someone who's bigger than you, land with a thud. It's not easy to get up from that. So saying, I am now gonna be the biggest saint in the world. I am not eating sugar ever again. I am not going to look at a screen or check my e-mail ever again. Whatever it is, I'm just gonna wear certain types of clothes. And then after a while, when it affects your mental health, it affects different things, and then you fall back into the sin, you're like, okay, forget it, I'm gonna go back all the way. So the pendulum swings, right? you know, from one extreme to the other. And they say that your nafs is your mount, your ride. So be easy on your ride, you know, in this dunya. And the way it is is to start small and give it something and then take something. Remember Imam Ghazali is speaking to someone who's been in knowledge for like years and years and years. So they should have at least weaned themselves off of the haram and the makruh, right? Like I can't imagine like someone like, you know, Someone who he's writing to is not addicted to watching, binging on Netflix or something like that, where they have to watch their gaze. They know, okay, they're involved in deen. For us, in our time, sometimes we even have to be diplomatic with the distractions that we wean out and how we even take out the haram in our lives. We have to be diplomatic. If somebody just says like, all right, that's it. Someone who's immersed in a certain type of entertainment, when they say, okay, that's it, I'm just not gonna do it again. Unless it's clearly haram and clearly harmful, then the cold turkey approach to some things like *********** or these types of things, that's the approach that you take. But for others, they have to wean themselves off of it. And the best way that you know that it's working is if you're doing less of the bad thing and more of the good. So just give yourself that pat on the back when you do diplomacy with your nafs, you start doing a little bit of good and you're building or you just have a holding pattern or you want to get rid of this habit. So you've cut down your Instagram time from like this many hours to this many hours. That's an improvement. So don't look down on yourself for that and go gradually, right? Inshallah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. So you start eating, you start binging on things in order to make up for some other type of need or emptiness that you have. And so, so you could, you could fulfill it through another way you're saying. Yeah. mashallah so our brother is saying that sometimes you go towards habits because there's some sort of void or something that you need to fill emotionally a soothing mechanism and so you tend to you know maybe like scroll to get a little feedback and what helps him is to just to carry a misbahar tasbih so that when you feel those times instead spend it in dhikr so you replace something with something else I think that's a very that's a very good idea mashallah Are there questions from the, thanks for that, thanks for that suggestion. Other questions from the forum? Yeah, that's how we should do it gradually. The Quran came down over 23 years, so that your heart becomes firm over time in it, right? In reality, for the teachings to be, to soak into the Sahaba, one by one, because the entire Quran came down overnight, we just have so much to implement. So you start with baby steps, and that's perfectly fine. And it's best to make a plan, and don't just make a plan for yourself. Like, okay, I plan to do this, maybe right now, try this, try this. So even when it comes to, like he was talking about Tahajid, why don't we try, okay, you know what, I'm gonna intend to wake up, I'm gonna try to go to sleep a little earlier, or not drink caffeine in the night if that keeps me up. and like try to get up, put the alarm a little further, do something and say, okay, I'll just wake up for even a minute or two and then just tell yourself more and more and more and like that, but have a holding pattern. Yeah. Yeah. In terms of good company and having spiritual place. I'm just, I'm just also repeating your question. So people also know. Yeah. Yeah. Okay, that's a very good point. Our brother says, MashaAllah benefiting us, saying that another way to kind of work in diplomacy with our addictions or our dependencies or our desires is to replace them with good and wholesome human interaction and good company, especially spiritual gatherings, MashaAllah. Yeah, alhamdulillah, hopefully may Allah count this as one of them, inshallah. Hopefully, Omar, is there any other, any questions? No. Okay, inshallah, so we'll see meet next week, inshallah. As-salallahu alayhi wa sallamu alayhi wa sallam.
