Bismillah Rahman Rahim Alhamdulillahi Rabbil Alameen Wa SallAllahu Ala Saidam Muhammad Allah Ali Wa Sahbi Jain Assalamu Alaikum Wa Rahmatullahi Wa Barakatu Alhamdulillah, we are in the fourth lesson of Imam Al-Ghazali's letter to his disciple called Ayuhalwala Dear Beloved Son and we're going to speak a bit more about the idea of knowledge and beneficial knowledge, action and intentions. As we mentioned last time, Imam Ghazali is going to come from many different angles in order to prove how actions and knowledge are tied together and how knowledge without action is actually not beneficial despite what many religious people or many students of knowledge may get into the delusion of thinking. So, in this section, Imam al-Ghazali begins, Bismina Rahan Rahim, Ayuh al-Walad, Aishma shitta fa'innaka bayitun, Wahbib man shitta fa'innaka mufariku, Wa'amal man shitta fa'innaka majziyunbi. In this section, he begins, Imam al-Ghazali says, Live as much as you want O beloved son, live as much as you want, for really you are dead. Love who you want, one day you will part with them. And do what you want, for you'll be recompensed for it. And so this is a very, very, it's a very strong quote to begin with. It's just to bring that. And it's to say, Imam Al-Azali is trying to say that, you know, what those three things, live Love and do, right? Live how you want, love who you want, do what you want. And when it comes to that, it's not always said, not said in such a way to say, you're allowed to, we take it differently now sometimes in our modern context. Do what you want, you've got only one life, live how you want, love whoever you want, it's your choice. No one can tell you who to love, that kind of thing. But at the end is where it all comes in, right? He's not saying it the way like it's a modern, materialistic, hedonistic piece of advice. He's saying live as much as you want 'cause really you're dead, not you are one day, it's almost as if now. you're among the dead. Because one day is very shortly, we all will be. And one day or another. And love whoever you want, but you can get as attached to people as you want, but just remember that you have to part from them. And this is what our modern materialistic hedonistic society will not tell you. And do what you want. But then there's the other part of it, which is you will be recompensed for it. You will be taken to account for it. And when a person realizes those three clauses, then they live very carefully. When they realize I can live it up, but I'm actually gonna die one day. Okay, so I'm not living forever. I can love who I want and get attached to things. But I know at the end of the day, I'm not gonna be with them forever in this world. whether it's a person, whether it's a thing, objects, ideas, causes, things like that. And then also the fact that when you realize that you can do what you want, but every single thing you do, you have to answer for, all of a sudden a person restricts their actions and starts to think about this. And so this is the thing that when you realize, when we realize that we are actually from among the dead, essentially, You know, because if you really look at it, right, look at every single person in the past, you know, sometimes I like to take a walk, you know, when you go to a high school or like a school or like a university and you see the pictures of historically past graduates on the walls and you know, I like to look at those pictures, especially when they start going back into the black and white and earlier, and then you see, you know, pictures of young people and then you're looking and you're thinking, Wow, they're all old or they're all gone. And sometimes you see videos on, YouTube you can see like Paris from like 1907, New York 1921. And it's just a whole, they're showing like a street corner. hustle and bustle. Like, you know, kids jumping everywhere and gentlemen walking and ladies walking behind them and, you know, working people and you just see a throng of humanity. Like life existed back then, life was real. And every single person in that frame, right, had a story, had something they were doing, had a whole social life and a complex web of interactions and feelings and emotions, a backstory, ambitions. And then you just think to yourself, they're all dead now. Every last person in that video is not on the face of this earth anymore. And even their children are dead now. And this is, it makes us give a cause for reflection. Because if a person realizes that, wait a second, All these people in the yearbook are gone now. All of these people in this video on this street corner of a town that I've been to or a city that I've been to, they're all gone now. Then what about me? What about me looking at these things? And so we often look at the dead in our lifetime, like, oh, I feel sorry for them. We don't realize that they too, at one point in time, we're also those people as John McCrae, Says in his poem the world war one poem in Flanders fields We are the dead short days ago we lived felt dawn felt sunsets glow and now we lie in flat Flanders fields people speaking He's acting as if he's speaking from the grave and he's writing that as a as a as a war veteran and so it was actually it was said that um And why is it that we can say that, you know, everyone is kind of really dead because Allah says in the Quran right in Surah Rahman that every single thing or person or being on the face of it on the face of the earth or in the world is is fan ***** is when is something that is just it's just going it's not that you that it will die but it's constantly in a state of going out winking out of existence Allah creates and maintains, but it's still going towards a slow decline. And so when one is in that state, Allah even addressed his own beloved Rasul , saying, right? That you, verily, the Prophet is referring to, as Allah is referring to the Prophet and saying, you are among those who have passed away. you are among the dead, you are, you are, or, among those, and they all who are persecuting, they are also among those who have, who are passing away, And so it shows us that it's not, we look at it like, oh, it's a stark difference. But when we realize, for example, like, just take a second to reflect, right? just like a little activity to bring it home. First of all, especially throughout the events that have happened, we see it up close, but does it change us? Does the remembrance of it change us and curtail our feelings? Like, do we say ever, like I could go down this evil road, but then I think, I don't know, what are we here for? And does it make us change our direction? This is why the remembrance of death is something we all benefit from. And it's not morbid. It's not, you know, the funniest thing is they said that there was one country that was one of the happiest countries, Bhutan, right? How many people know the country Bhutan or where it is? You know, it's almost a very little known country. It's like, it's kind of isolated country, but it's because they have in their culture, there's the remembrance of death. So it allows them to experience joy and gratitude for what they are living in now, right? May Allah make everything inshallah good for us. So it's not about something morbid. It's just knowing that even in the best of health, we have to go back to Allah. And this is why, you know, when we think to ourselves like, okay, let's say you're about 20. Let's say you're 20 years old. Let's say you're 30 or let's say you're 40. Okay. Something I like to think about is at 20, 30 or 40, right? How fast did the past 20 years pass by? You really think about it like just in a nutshell, like, okay, how fast does that feel that it passed by? How fast did the last 20 years pass by? You're 20, right? More than 20. Yeah. How fast did the last 20 years pass by? Fast, right? It's LC? Same, right? You like think, okay, can you go back in your mind and rewind all your events? You can. So some people say it passed like in a blink of an eye. Some people say 20 years pass in a blink of an eye. Okay, if that's 20 years, how long does a person usually live? What, 60, 80, max 100? years, you know, that divided by 20, you have how many three, four, five blinks of an eye. How many are left? We don't know. So when you think about it, all that time that passed will also pass. So we ask a lot to keep us in the best of health states, give us, you know, long lives, but also keep in front of our eyes that we got, you know, that we have to remember Allah in these moments and allow, if not through the idea of loving Allah and drawing near to Allah, then something has to remind us and at least pull us back from the things that we are doing wrong. It is said that, you know, over one of the graves, I mean, they said that it was over the grave of Imam Abu Hanifa and Allah knows best that it was written over like on a stone or perhaps on a tombstone type of thing is saying, oh, you standing over my grave, do not wonder at my state. for yesterday I was like you and tomorrow you will share my fate right it so anybody looking at it always thinks that oh they feel sorry for that person and he's like don't don't feel sorry just think about you know what you're gonna go on to right and And then the idea of parting from those who you love, right? Because it's love for people and love for things, whether it's a love for the opposite gender, a spouse, children, wealth, positions, and levels of achievement, right? At the end of the day, we all get attached to things. It's natural. No one's saying that you don't love somebody, but make that love something that's worth it. Because at the end of the day, if you're going to part from it, then if it's for Allah, you'll find it again. You'll find that again or better. But if it's not for Allah, then that's where there's a true parting when this world is finished. Because at the end of the day, everything that insan, humankind, mankind has, they think they own it. This is the thing. And in reality, we own nothing. We don't own anything. It's borrowed. Really, you know, we say my car, my house, my clothes. You know, the minute the time comes to leave the world, all those things will be given to our inheritors. Someone else will be wearing the clothes. You know, someone else will be, SubhanAllah, what was this building before it was the center? What was this building? We don't even know. Who was in this, let's put it this way, before we were here, who was here? What were their stories? We don't know. When was this built? We don't know. What about this land? Who was working on this land before we were here? And before anybody came and before there was ever Canada. So there's always a kind of a changeover and we just keep thinking because things are renewed and we have them for a time that we are owners and in reality we are just borrowers and Allah is the owner of all. Now when this statement was made, right, about live how you want, love who you want and and do what you want. It's, you know, there is very similar to Allah's statement in the Quran. Whoever wishes, then let them believe and whoever wishes, then let them disbelieve. It doesn't mean when Allah is saying that, that he's saying it's okay to disbelieve. He's just saying you do what you want. You do what you want. So in that way, it's not saying it's a permission, but it's saying uh it's it's saying it in a in a rhetorical sense um so we shouldn't understand it in any other way and uh and as well uh next the next the next piece of advice is Imam al-Ghazali says ayu halwalad ayu shayin hal silun laka mintahsili almil kalam wal khilaf wat talab wad dawaween wal ashar wan nujoom wal arud wan nahu So he says, Imam Ghazali now starts talking about what is it that you should learn? What should you study? And what are the different subjects and how do they shape up and different subjects that you learn? And he says, and we'll translate it. He's saying, what is the upshot of what you have gained? What have you gained from studying the knowledge of speculative theology and differences of opinion and debates and medicine and literature and poetry and astronomy or astrology and poetic meter and grammar? and syntax or a morphology other than a wasting away of your lifespan by Allah mighty and majestic. Allah, he swears, he says, by Allah, what is it that you've gained from all these things except a wasting of your lifespan, right? So now it's interesting how he says this because he's talking about, so he's basically saying, what will you get? out of all the things you studied and learned? That's the question that we have to ask ourselves. This is the point that he's saying. Now, it might seem like he's putting down any sort of worldly learning. In fact, there are subjects that he mentioned, right? Theology, debate, medicine, literature, poetry, logic, language, astronomy, some of these, you need them for your deen even, but they're tool sciences, Ulumul Allah, they are tool sciences. And so it seems that he's putting it down and This has to be clarified. Remember who he's speaking to. He's not speaking to a university graduate. He's not speaking to like, you know, an engineer or a, you know, someone else, you know, a doctor. He's a medical doctor. He's speaking to a senior scholar and a student of knowledge, right? And he's asking that all these other things that you fancy, you know, because many times Olama were polymaths, especially in the previous age. You know, it was like it was very common that the scholar was also the mathematician. He was an astronomer, you know, with knowledge of medicine, with knowledge of chemistry, which with knowledge of language, I mean, to like par excellence. So all of these other things that you that that you went into or the tools that you use even for your dean, right? What is what's the end result of what that knowledge did for you? And did that knowledge really take you to a law? Did it benefit you or was it just a waste of time? Like, oh, I read a lot of books in, you know, architectural design, you know, but what did you do with that architectural design? Right. So this is what he's trying to ask now at the end of the day as well, the commentators saying our commentators saying that it's not that those. So yes, there are some of those subjects which would not be considered even permissible. So the ulema, they had differences of opinion on some of these issues. And they felt, for example, that some of these knowledges are fard kifaya, are collective duties. But some of these knowledges, or for those who are not involved in filling that gap or going beyond that, then it becomes disliked or even impermissible to pursue those knowledges. Why? So we are now in a civilization and in a time where all knowledge is worth pursuing, just without any borders or without any purpose. And so it's knowledge for knowledge's sake. That's our model in our time now. And they've reached amazing heights. You know, if you look at the amount of knowledge the modern university system has acquired, it's just amazing. It wasn't that there wasn't that pursuit of knowledge in the Islamic civilization. Anyone who says that is either ignorant or they're trying to, it's a colonial smear on an Islamophobic sphere, a smear on Islamic civilization, but rather it was knowledge for Allah's sake. So our architecture had purpose and meaning, not just to build higher and higher buildings, it had purpose and meaning. Our literature had also meaning towards it, our poetry. Even the Jahili poetry that the Arabs used to declaim was preserved, even though some of it is very graphic or sometimes even immoral. The reason why is because they wanted to preserve the Arabic language. And so they, because the Quran is in classical Arabic. And so in order to do that, they preserved poetry. Or, you know, for example, why did, you know, you have Shaharistani, you have, for example, Ibn Khaldun and others, you know, they studied other cultures, other religions and detailed, like, you know, detailed their belief systems. They detailed the different, the different idiosyncrasies and the different debates but why in order to juxtapose them from the truth not just to get involved in something so it's funny because like you would ask somebody who I asked somebody who studied who is an academic you know not a Muslim an academic friend of you know professional friend of mine worked with for many years and I said you know you get you're getting all these grants you're doing all this research And you're so in the nitty gritty of Islamic manuscripts and everything. And it's like you could talk to this person as a student of knowledge to speak to one of these people, you see a whole different side of things. It's really interesting and fun to speak to them. And then I said, so what is it all for? What do you all get? What do you want out of it at the end? He said, I don't know. It's just something I like to do. Do you even hold any respect or significance? towards what you're studying. Funny thing is Islam academically sometimes is the only subject perhaps where the people studying it don't have to respect what they're studying sometimes. And so he said, No, it's nothing personal. I just keep going. And I said, So what do you want out of it, like in the long run? He goes, I'd like it that someday somebody can say in the future that I made a contribution to something. Okay, they benefited from something I wrote. I was like, Wow, that's just it. That's the result of all of your years of toil and struggle and grants and countless hours. And this is what Imam Ghazali is saying, right? It's in front of us now. It's not like back then, and it's not just astronomy and alchemy. We're talking about a real question of why do we learn what we learn, right? And even to go to university and to get something, to learn something, to make money off of it is still an intention for Allah if you do it for Allah's sake. Right? So these are all these questions because the more that we learn, right? One of the things that it does is it fills our head like we've learned a lot and we are respectable now, right? And so Imam al-Ghazali is saying in of itself, these subjects are not necessarily going to save you unless you do them for Allah. So obviously theology, the ulema, the speculative theology, not basic aqeedah. That's something everybody needs to know. Speculative theology, when they started to debate with the Mu'atazila and other sects and things like discussions with philosophers, the Ulama said that this, many of the early Ulama said, no, this is not permissible to get into. But what they were referring to was when the field was the domain of these deviant sects and groups. But as the need arose that the Ulama got into these fields and mastered them and brought Islamic truth into them and uh and succeeded in um in suppressing and putting down or just refuting the falsehoods that these other groups had brought so for them that is fard kifaya the same you know two people could be getting into the same um same science and one of them is doing it as a fard kifaya and getting a reward for a fard and the other one is just dabbling in debate and empty empty speculation and discussion. The other one is the idea of do you have to study khilaf, which are differences of opinion and stuff like that. And humankind, we're attracted to disagreement and debate, right? And this is a shahwa from the nafs. So this is something that derails a student of knowledge as well. Yes, you need to know some of the differences, especially like the differences in between the Fiqah within, those are things that are beneficial for the Talibulim to know, right? Why? Because you appreciate. Imam Abu Hanifa said this, Imam Shafi said this, that the students of Imam Abu Hanifa, that they opined a bit differently. It gives you a broader perspective, right? An appreciation for how Fiqh works, for example. But the debates between the sects Sometimes, many times, you get yourself into it and it goes far beyond what you even need and sometimes you might not even find the person, you have to go look for the person to argue with them or you go online and how much, how many hours are spent wasted, I should say, on debates on like the comment section of something or on Reddit or whatever the forums are. And so this is why at that point it takes a person into a shahwa of refuting the other person, which is why it's impermissible, right, to do that. And even about logic, mantik, if it was studied and used, to take a person into a field of inquiry that is primarily battle false, then, of course, the study of logic had no significance for those people and no merit in it. And it is on this basis that that some all of us said that month should not be studied at all. Others feeling that it doesn't lead to anything but the style of of intellectual pursuit that philosophers, you know, materialist philosophers and other deviant groups engaged in. However, interestingly, Imam Ghazali himself is a master of some of these fields, right? He's a master of some of these fields. So we shouldn't think that by him saying this, it's saying, haha, he's anti-intellectual, not at all, right? Not at all, especially look at medicine as well. If you look at medicine, what did Imam Shafi, what is he reported to have said? That knowledge is of two types. that the knowledge of religion and the knowledge of bodies meaning medicine he felt that medicine and religion and medicine were the two beneficial types of knowledge. Because one benefits the body in this world, one benefits the person in this world and in the hereafter. So those are two beneficial things that you can't just study medicine for no reason in that sense. It's always a benefit to find out how to help people, how to cure people and things like this. So this is the approach that Imam Shafi is taking. The funny thing though, is that in Imam Shafi's time, there was a medicine was not considered a prestigious necessarily or a lucrative field. In fact, Imam Ghazali in other writings of his is kind of like taking people to task, taking the intellectuals to task in his time and saying everybody wants to rush to study Islamic knowledge, but nobody wants to go become a doctor. because there's respect in Islamic knowledge, because in the Muslim world, you didn't have pop stars and rap stars and movie stars. You had, as what my Sheikh calls, deen stars. You had the mufassir and you had the muhaddith and the faqih. So everybody wanted to send their kid to become an halim, because when they become an halim, they, I'm not saying everybody, this became, as Islamic knowledge became popular or respected. in the Muslim world, it became, and also became something that was employed by government. So it could give you a job. It could give you respect. And this then made people go away from other fields and there was Fard Kifaya. There was a need for doctors, medical doctors, and they just, they weren't enough people. So Imam Ghazali is lamenting that why is it that we have to, our people have to go to, you know, the people of the book, Jewish and Christian doctors. And whereas there are, you know, doctors, have to make sometimes decisions that have legal, Islamic legal implications. And if you keep going outside and they're becoming the doctors and you're not, you're gonna have to, and it's completely opposite today, completely opposite today. Everybody says, your kid has, you're gonna raise him to be a doctor, if not a doctor or her to be a doctor, then like something else, something else. But that's what everyone's running after because for different reasons, right? perhaps Allah knows best unless everybody just decided. I know for myself, I'm not picking on anybody or my doctor friends, but I know for myself I was on that path to want to become a doctor. And I realized what, you know, my science teacher basically laid bare what my intentions were. So I'm only speaking for myself. I'm not judging anybody else, but it resonates with what Imam Ghazali is saying. And So this is the question, do we do it for good? Do we do it for Allah? Do we do it for the dunya? And there are many other different sciences that he mentioned, astronomy and astrology. The interesting thing is, so in the previous times, it's important to remember when they talk about like a nujoom, they kind of conflated in one sense astronomy and astrology. So because of they had an amazing knowledge of the stars. right they had a the Arabs and the Persians had a vast knowledge of the stars that without which the basically all of human civilization is indebted to Muslim astronomy as well as Muslim mathematics and everything Islamic mathematics but there was also kind of a a mix between those two fields, astronomy, which is the scientific study of the celestial bodies and astrology, which is kind of gets into more like the effects of the supposed effects of those things on world events or on human beings. And so that becomes something that goes towards superstition, the horoscopes and these types of things. And that is what, as we separate it now, that is what is impermissible, absolute impermissible. In fact, I say that's disbelief, right? To pursue and believe in, right? And whereas looking into astronomy, but for what? For mapping things, for benefit, not just Star Wars and Space Wars and conquering more of the sky. because we have to go where Noma has gone before. That was not the intention of the Muslim scientists and scholars, right? And so what it comes down to is that what you see from Imam al-Ghazali when he's talking about this part is that basically studying these knowledges to him, as the commentator says, is is really it's better not to if you have the ability to study Dean and so this is what he's saying if you our best and our brightest should not be going into every other field and not Dean you know rather our best and our brightest should be saying if I get these grades I'm gonna go study the Dean and do something for Allah with that right and and that should be our and if not that or if that need has been fulfilled then by all means study medicine by all means study astronomy and all these other things so that's what he's saying and that that it's in one sense it's a dispensation to study those those sciences the other thing is to remember that Imam Ghazali is not saying at all he actually explicitly does say that It's not worldly sciences are not bad. So anybody, if anybody thinks that, you know, the false orientalist claim that, that, um, al-Ghazali, you know, closed the doors to Ijtihad and, you know, after his time, he refuted the philosophers and knowledge went on a decline in the Muslim world. You know, it's a, that's a, that's, uh, that's a falsehood. And many of these things are basically, um, invented during colonial times to, you know, with the, with the direct or indirect aim of making Muslims lose confidence in their civilization. Because when you've lost that game up here, it's very easy. The game, you know, you've lost. Basically, when you lose confidence in who you are and your identity, and they make you feel, and people make you feel inferior, you've automatically lost your struggle, right? So it really starts up here. So, and that is false. And in fact, Imam al-Ghazali is saying that no, and they refer to this in his other writings. that no, these sciences are, these worldly sciences are important. They are necessary. Just like, right, you have people who guard the outposts of the Muslim borders against the crusaders, for example. There were people, the Murabitun, they had set up watch posts on the frontier lands of the Muslims, the Ribat. And their job was just to stand in a tower and watch the horizon to see if any enemies were coming. And they just stayed there in the outskirts of the Muslim lands, waiting for an enemy. And if the enemy came, they would not make a call, announce and alert the rest of the people. So that is a job that needs to be done. But there are also people who are doing those jobs, who are in that function, but their job is just to bring water to the people who are guarding the border. There are others who are just there to bring fodder for the animals, for those people. And each of those people are in the path of Allah, and each of those people are being rewarded. for the greater purpose for why those people are there. So Imam Qazali does tie all of the knowledge back, right? But it's just really about how the intention of how we approach it. And then he continues and he says, And then he says that for I have seen in the gospel that Isa said, now he's gonna make a quote, he's gonna bring a quote from what he says is from the gospel. I wasn't I didn't see a reference given for what they're referring to as the gospel. Is that actually in the New Testament or not? Is that in the Bible or not? But the point is that he's bringing a report that perhaps he heard as a report that was going around in his time. And so they ascribe that back to Isa and Allah knows best. We can't say yes for sure. We cannot deny that either. So it is that Isa is reported to have said, right? And now if somebody says as well that, wait a second, how come you're quoting Imam al-Ghazari? How come you're quoting from the previous books? Because we know that Omar forbade people from reading the books of the previous nation saying the Quran is enough for you. However, we know that the Prophet has also said, he also said, , narrate from the children of Israel, the Bani Israel, the previous nations, without any difficulty, without any problem. And narrate from me too, the Prophet is reported to have said, but do not lie on me. Do not say anything false attributed to me. So right there, it's showing the standards of what the Prophet is asking for in the way that you narrate something has to be obviously sound. So the difference is if there's a need to, there are conditions to fulfill. If there's a need to, then a scholar may look into the previous books to quote something because the sacred law that we have, we also consider that a sacred law. And if there's an aspect of our sacred law that it is silent on, then it may well be that it has not changed since the previous sacred law. However, that cannot conflict with a principle in our sacred law. So the Qawaid and the Usul of our sacred law cannot be violated, right? And it cannot go against, we have to know whether it's a difference between, is it related to law or is it related to something like virtues? You know, if it's something related to virtues or history, that's that's a different story. And does it go against not only a Qaeda, a principle or an usul and also, but also a report from, you know, Hadith, Quran, Hadith saying of the Sahaba, whether even if it's a weak report. Why? Because we don't know if the previous scriptures, what of it has been corrupted and what hasn't. So there are rules to how we quote this, right? So then he continues to quote what is narrated from Isa saying, Minsa'ati an yuda'a al-mayyatu al-janazati ila an yuda'a shafir al-qabri yas Allahu ta'ala bi'alamatihi minhu arba'inasu alan awwal ma yakkul Allahu ta'ala So he's saying that Isa is reported to have said that from the time that the Mayyat, the deceased is placed inside, the janazah is taken out and they are placed inside the edge of their, into the edge of their graves. Allah SWT asks with his might and majesty 40 questions to the deceased person, okay? The first is that Allah SWT asks, My servant, my servant, the first question that he asks is, my servant for years, you purified what people see of you, but you didn't purify what I see of you for even one hour. Let's say this again, my servant for years, You purified, you beautified, you decked out, you watched over, you pruned and you primmed and you maintained what people see of you, your outward and your behavior, but you didn't purify what I see of you, meaning looking into your heart for even a single hour, even though each day I'm gazing into your heart. even though we know that Allah is looking straight into our hearts. This is what Imam Al-Ghazali is trying to say here, that you have all this knowledge. Did you realize Allah is looking into your heart? And was your knowledge changing how Allah sees you inside your heart, right? And Allah says, and that he says Allah says my servant my servant how much do you do for other than me even while you are enveloped in blessings from me right how much do you do for the sake of other people How much have you done for this and for that and for this? But tell me, did you realize you were completely enveloped, absorbed, drowning, soaked in goodness that was coming from me? So how many times did you stop and think, what did I do for Allah today if I did all these things for everyone else? And Allah is giving me all the health and strength and wealth and ability and whatever it is to do things. He says, rather you are deaf and you cannot hear. You cannot hear how Allah is speaking to you and asking you what's in your heart. Imam al-Ghazali continues. And he says, he says, . He says, let's get to that slide. He says, O beloved son or dear child, knowledge without action is insanity. Knowledge without action is insanity and action without knowledge has no reality, right? So, sorry, I have to forgive these cheesy rhymes, but you know, when Imam Ghazali is rhyming it in such a nice way in the Arabic, you have to try to give a little bit of the flavor in English too. He says, He says act in knowledge, acquiring knowledge without any action is absolute madness, it's insanity. Because at the end of the day, you're spending your life doing something when that knowledge itself is telling you, you'll be condemned for having it without acting on it. So it's like you're eating something that's, you're drinking something that's labeled poison. And it says, if you drink me, you will die or something and you're still drinking it even though you can see it. So Islamic knowledge is the same way. It's the same way. So he's saying it's madness because you can only, you can only be just, you know, you can only be nonsensical if you don't even see that you have to practice it. Right. And because it is not sought for itself. So here it's interesting. He's not talking just about worldly knowledge, some religious knowledge. So before he was speaking about worldly knowledge, now he's just going to in general, right? He's going to imagine. He's then he's saying, an action without knowledge has no reality. Why? Because if you try to do an act, but you don't have knowledge of that act, will that act even be valid? Will that act even be legitimate? You know? You could say, for example, someone is sick and a person opens the kitchen sink under the kitchen sink, see a bunch of chemicals, mixes them into a cup, stirs it and gives it to that person to drink. The person gets sick or dies. They say, what did you do that for? They say, I didn't know. I was just trying to help. I just gave them some mixture. I had no knowledge about medicine or anything. I just gave it to them. You would say that that act is completely False and that is invalid. You did not help anybody. You couldn't even try. So action without knowledge when you try to do something without knowing has no reality. You can't drive a car if you don't know how to drive. You can't operate if you don't know how to operate. Then how can you go through life doing millions of actions a day when you don't even have the knowledge of how to conduct yourself in accordance with Allah's pleasure. Right? And this is the question, so you don't know how to pray, how are you gonna say a valid prayer if you don't know how to pray? Just go to someone who's not Muslim, just say, hey, say a prayer. Do you think they're gonna say, okay, Allah Akbar, and they're not gonna say that. They're gonna go down on the ground, they're gonna start doing different things because this is the whole point, has no reality. It's actually without knowledge. And our commentator brings a this story that many people know of Sheikh Abdul Qadr al-jilani one of the greatest of the of the saints and the pious worshippers of Allah in Islamic history you know according to the to the consensus of the ummah and he tells a story Sheikh Abdul Qadr tells a story about how once he was out in a desert he was out in a desert and thirsty and perhaps alone and all of a sudden a cloud came and just covered him over covered him over completely and a cloud came down right very close to him and offered him some rainwater to sip and he was able to drink it right and this is the subhanAllah the level of his piety that even the clouds are coming and they're coming down and giving him water and then a voice came out of the clouds a voice came out of the clouds saying oh Abdul Qadr I am your Lord and I have made for you everything that was haram I have made it halal for you now you reach that level of piety you don't have any more haram you everything is halal for you and he said he said I take refuge I seek refuge in Allah from the accursed devil when he heard that that was the voice and he said that the the the light just turned into darkness the the cloud lifted up and the entire scene changed The entire scene changed and he realized and then he said that he heard the voice of the devil saying that you have rescued yourself, right, through your knowledge to walk on the commands of your Lord and been given and your knowledge of how this deen works and what your Lord wants, you've been saved by that. right and he said and I before you previous to you I had misguided the likes of you 70 of the pious worshipers that were the likes of you through the same trick meaning giving them a voice from the sky saying you hit the heights you don't have any Sharia anymore you have knowledge you don't need to act now in other words this is what Imam Alhazali is saying you have knowledge now you don't need to act and people when they reach sometimes like as their students they're very diligent in their knowledge as their students. And then what he's implying is once you hit a certain height, you just think I know it all. I don't need to follow this. I understand. I don't need to take precautions because I'm good already. I don't need to do this. Oh, I slipped up. Well, you know, Hadith says this. Oh, I can keep doing this as long as people don't see because I'm an example. So I won't show it to them. But, you know, this is not whatever. And then that hardness of heart just comes from telling people what to do and doing the opposite. Telling people what to do, doing the opposite, telling people what to do in the opposite. It starts small and it continues and then it just grows hard, like the heart grows harder and harder and harder. So religious knowledge is a blessing but a burden as well, is something very potent, something we'll be asked about, right? So may all save us from saying things without acting on them, from hypocrisy, from having our ill be a be a proof against us, subhanAllah. And then Imam al-Ghazali continues, Ayuh al-Walad. Yeah, so we read that part. Wa'alam, anna kulla 'ilmin la yuba 'iduka liyum an alma'asi wala yahmiluka ala ta'ati lan yuba 'idaka ghadan an'ari juhannam. He's saying that just know, he's saying know that every single type of knowledge that does not take you further today. Let's actually see, we get a slide up here. Know that every point of knowledge that doesn't take you further from sins today and doesn't carry you toward worship will not take you further from hellfire tomorrow. And this is what he's, this is the point he's making about a type of a taswif, perhaps a type of a procrastination or a putting off that sometimes people of knowledge can do. To say, for example, you remember the brothers of Yusuf ? They said, today we'll do this act of throwing our brother in the well or killing or doing something, getting rid of him. And tomorrow we'll be among the righteous. And so there's this idea sometimes where, okay, I've got all this knowledge. Yeah, yeah, but it's a lot to act on. I'm not perfect. I'm not, you know, I don't claim to be anybody, so I'll act on it some other time or it'll still help me because I have it and I'm teaching it. Now, there are different levels of how you act on your knowledge. And as one of the ulama was saying, , May Allah preserve him and bless him. Listing like how yes, you can have knowledge and teach it and not benefit from it yourself. There's still a reward in teaching the knowledge, but it's still gonna be against you. So you can't just say, well, at least I'm teaching the knowledge and I'm not acting on it myself. There is still a reward that you can get from teaching that because you're giving it to others. who will do something good with it, but it still comes against you if you don't practice and apply it. And so this idea of, if that knowledge, and so this is the thing, right, if we're studying and we're seeking knowledge and it's not taking us further from our sins, like we just continue to have those bad qualities, maybe we start hiding them from people, but we make no effort or intention to get rid of it. And that's the whole point. It's not that you become perfect. Oh, I've joined this class. I'm now perfect. None of us are like that. Okay, we all have our flaws. We all have our sins. May Allah forgive us all. But the point is, do we even intend? Do we even try to work on it? Or do we just say, that's one of the things I do bad between me and my Lord. I don't care. I have the other things to do. I'm a student. And this is the point, no. Because if that knowledge isn't taking you further away from your sins, at least at least thinking or trying to do that then uh and for into the worship of Allah meaning you're teaching about all this things about prayer and do you also you know pray do you also do these things then it's not going to help um in the hereafter and then Imam al ghazali continues um for you call and he's saying and if you do not act upon your act through your and if you do not act there's something unclear in the in the matan here to me and if you do not act upon your knowledge and you do not try to make up for all those previous days right all those previous days that you lost out on that you could have been acting on that knowledge so you realize now but you're like oh man I have to make up for all these years I haven't been acting on it or I've been in hypocrisy you know then you will say tomorrow on the day of judgment when you get there as Allah says as Allah speaks about in the Quran send us back when you get to the hereafter to the angels who are responsible for punishment send us back because we will work righteous deeds if you send us back to the dunya other than what we used to do before. And it will be said to a person who wants to try to go back, once they've reached the next life, it will be said, oh fool, oh imbecile, you just came from there. So you had the chance to work. And now you're asking, can I please come back? Can I please go back? I'll work good deeds. I promise that will be too late. The amazing thing is that the amazing thing about this though, even if we look at how many years have passed and we say, oh man, so much time has passed and you know like how am I gonna make up for that will I even be able to make up for all the things I did bad as one of the Sufis said as we heard from our teacher as we heard from our teacher as they said what a this this saying this saying that what an amazing treasure fix up what remains of your life and you will be forgiven for everything that passed what an amazing offer from Allah what a deal what a deal just fix up what remains and you will be forgiven for everything that passed a person could be could die at like 99 years old and they spent one year in the worship of Allah they realized and they fixed that up and that one year can can can you know, address 99 years worth of negligence or worth of inaction. And he says, and the trick then, as he's, the commentator is saying, is to try to fill your time with good actions, with good work. So the one who is, as our teachers teach us that the spiritually adept worshipper and one who is traveling on that path of spirituality, they try not to leave a portion of their day or any place that they are without something they're doing for Allah. So that could mean different deeds, like, okay, I'm going to recite this at this time, and from this time after this prayer, I have this thing I say, and then after this time I go do this, but it's also in like, okay, at this time I'll also help this person. This time I will exercise to thank Allah for my strength and make myself stronger to worship and seek knowledge. At this time I will cook food for my family. At this time I will earn money for them. At this time I will relax and recreate. so that my mind cools down so I can go back to my worship with renewed vigor so even though it seems like they're doing things of a of a of a mundane nature that person who is realized with what the our masters are speaking about they're always putting some time their their time is working for them you know what they say like in in in in wealth with wealth they say like you know who was it was it um Not guy Kawasaki. I forgot who it was. Rich dad, poor dad. I forget. He said that, you know, basically it's like, if you have a million dollars, you're not rich. If it's just sitting there and you're saving it because literally that money, you're going to have to spend it out, spend it one day and you're making nothing on it. You're actually losing potential income, but it's only if you take that money and you start, you invest it and it's making you back money. That's when you are really using your money. That's when you're benefiting from And the same way your time, just because you have a lot of time, right? Doesn't mean you're actually, it's actually to your credit, but you have to make every single time, just like every single dollar in the world work for you. And so what is this moment doing for me? What is this moment doing? Is it giving anything back for me? And honestly, we have to ask ourselves this like, because, you know, with the advent of the internet, right? It's something that, You know, do I ask myself this? What is this website? What is this post? What is this real? What is this video? What is this link? What is this message doing for me? And it was much easier in the previous age where there was less information. And I'm not talking about the Haram necessarily. I'm talking about even just the mundane things that we don't even need to know, let alone the things that we're not supposed to know or see. So it's like there's so much now coming in at every single, bombarding our senses. As one of the South Korean philosophers said, that the cell phone has become the new rosary. The cell phone has become the new rosary. Muslims, if you look in the traditional Muslim world, they walk around with their misbahas like this all the time. They're just walking around with it sometimes. And you see in the Gulf as well, you see people swinging these 33 misbahas sometimes, even just holding it as worry beads almost. But it's not those types of worry beats, like how you have in the West or like a fidget spinner. But it's just like it's always there. It's something that you kept on you just because you're so familiar with the dhikr, that the means to dhikr became something endeared to you. And that our cell phone has become like that. And why is it that I'm still always just checking, checking, checking, just tapping? I didn't even hear anything, just checking. I know that when I get an alert, or a ping, it'll make a sound. Still, for some reason, I'm checking, maybe my phone was silent. Why haven't I gotten something? And so it becomes like a rosary of our time, as this South Korean philosopher is saying, it's a penetrating insight, it's so relevant to us. And saying that now, he went to a dentist and he saw a child getting a procedure done in the dentist's chair and the child was crying. And or was it that he or he heard that people now, when they're about to go through a painful experience in the dentist chair, they wanna hold onto their cell phones rather than hold onto the hand of their parent. So rather than hold the hand of your child to comfort them, give me my cell phone. And they find a kind of a connection or dependency, emotional dependency. And subhanAllah it's like, yet still, let alone students, everyone is going through this, students of knowledge as well. Anyways, I'm not going to go on and on, but it is a challenge. So do we use our moments and our days and our nights to do something for Allah even if it's nothing to do with Dini stuff, religious stuff, still just let's find an intention. And if we can't find an intention as our teachers teach us, if you can't find an intention for Allah's sake, get rid of it. Get rid of it because it's not going to do you any good. If it's not going to bring you close to Allah. So ... Oh you who has sat back from the good character aspects of his character and has worn the garments of pride and arrogance with outward sciences of the outward sciences whoever does not Whoever's knowledge does not refine their character will not benefit from their knowledges in the hereafter, right? So that's another thing. It's not just about the actions that we're doing, like are we racking up the points with Allah by doing more? Are we following the rules in an ever more detailed manner? That's good, but it's not just that. It's is that knowledge refining our character? So if I am like super Muslim and super, you know, you know, Muslim, I've got all the details down. I can show you in every Hashia where it's highlighted and whatever. And I go around, go back home and I'm just like, you know, behaving like this towards my family. I'm behaving like this towards my teachers, towards my, my, my, my colleagues, then in reality, then I haven't benefited from the knowledge. Even if it's that, that's not what I learned about, even though, like you might wonder like if I learn about wudu how's that going to benefit me but in every branch of knowledge of Islam there is a benefit for your Akhlaq and in every single act of worship and obligation there is a a something that is training your character with others and with Allah as they say I didn't make that up that's that's what I've heard from others um and then Imam al-Ghazali continues as oh dear uh beloved child he's giving this advice and he says pull up that slide says put ambition in your soul dear child put ambition in your soul put defeat in your ego and put death in your body right so what does it mean Put ambition in your soul, have high hymma, have a sense of purpose and ambition. The way that somebody says, the way that when they're about to go to the Olympics, it's not like they just show up the night before and they say, okay, that's it. They put an ambition in their heart. Sometimes since the time they were children, since the time they were children, they say, I am going to swim like that person. I am gonna box like that person. Put ambition in your soul. Look at the people who went before you, the pious elders, your teachers, those of the exemplars of the our civilization and say, I want to be like that. Or even if you don't take anyone, just look at what Imam Alhazali is saying, say, oh Allah, I want to be like that with you. You know, make me someone just like this as the Munshid Sayyid says, make me someone just like this, you know, so put ambition in your soul. Put defeat in your ego. What do they mean defeat in your ego? He means that, you know, make your ego subdue it and make it understand it's not gonna win. That's why he's saying put defeat in your ego, not defeat to other people. Defeat against your own nuffs for its own sake. Make sure you train it to understand you are subservient. you are you are you have to listen to the heart in obedience with Allah so put that defeat in your ego don't make it walk around triumphant over you and he say he says as well that and put death into your body as somebody somebody translates and I think this is a fair way of translating put mortification into your body literally what Imam Ghazali said was put death into what does it mean it means to mortify it don't you know just understand that this body its pleasures are not everything and so remember that in every body part you know in everything just remember that this is a temporary body and don't just give it everything it wants all the pleasures it wants everything it wants just remember that a sign that this body is temporary it will go to the hereafter and so mortifying it not in terms of punishing it but in controlling through knowing what it's for do not give it something that will cause the death of the spirit so keep that in your mind in your for your body And then Imam Al-Ghazali continues. Why? Why do all this? Because your final resting place is going to be the grave. Because the people of the graves are watching you every single second wondering when will this person come to us? When will this person come? When is the time of this person to come? right because they see everybody walking around and they're saying this person is walking around when is their turn so do we also realize that when you know that that that we have a turn Imam Ghazali says and beware beware says it twice that you reach to them without any provision without anything You know, what is a provision? When you go on a journey and you fill up gas, you put a little money in your pocket, you take a snack, you take food, you take something else, wiping socks or whatever it is that you take for your journey. That's your provision. That's your Zad. And that provision is what takes you to your destination. And he's saying, don't reach them without having anything to show for your journey, right? Without anything to fuel that journey. And And he's then he quotes and says, Because Abu Baqar as-Siddiq, qa'a Abu Baqar as-Siddiq, qa'addi . He said, Because Abu Baqar has said, these bodies of ours are cages of birds or stables of beasts. Think for yourself, which one are you? A lofty bird or a lowly beast? right? This body that contains our soul, our ego, our spirit. Is it a cage of a bird where if you open the door, a bird will just go and fly out, but fly high, high and soar, lofty in the sky, and then find a very high perch in the gardens of paradise? Or that's gonna be the rule going straight up? Or will it be like a stable, you know, full of filth, smelly, you know impure and when it opens all it does that beast whether it's cattle whether it's whatever just plods on the ground in its own filth towards another place of filth what well what are these bodies that's what that's what he's saying Abu Bakr is reported to have said which one of these are you from if you are whether you are from the bird the lofty bird so then whenever when as soon as you hear the drumbeat the drumbeat of of the divine saying that go back oh soul to your Lord in a state that is pleasing and well pleased pleasing to Allah and well pleased then enter among my servants and enter my paradise when is that what you're going to hear when that time comes right or or tathiru sa'idan That you go and fly until you sit on the highest perches of the towers of paradise. The way that the Prophet has said, That the throne of Allah shook at the death of Sa'ad ibn Mu'adh, pleased with him. What does that mean? Why? So this is a Sahabi who passed away after the battle of Khandak, the trench. He was hit by an arrow and he passed away. He was one of the chief of the Khazraj tribe among the Ansar. And when he passed away, the Prophet was obviously, you know, he was an amazing Muslim, one of the mighty great Muslims of the Sahaba. And he said that now that Saad has passed away, the throne of Allah is shaking. And this is interpreted in different ways. But the commentator says that it was shaking out of joy for the soul of Saad al-Da'an who coming to be in the hereafter in paradise. And so the throne of Allah is the canopy is this is the ceiling of the of paradise is the throne of Allah so that the whole heavens were rejoicing for this soul to come. Right. Is this? So why does he bring this? Imam Ghazali brings this to show, is this what our soul will be like when we go? That the heavens are rejoicing at our arrival, but we have to be worked towards. And may refugee in Allah is sought, if you are among the beasts, the stable, the beasts in your body is like a stable, a Sufli, the low, the way that Allah said, that they are the poly are like cattle rather they are even more misguided in their path than them and so you're not even safe if you're one of those beasts that you're going to transfer one day from a corner in your your house to the fire of hellfire right so do we think about that do we do we even think about that it is narrated Hassan al-Basri Rahmata alai was once altiya lahu alti lahu shirbata ma'in baridin. So Hassan al-Basir Rahmata alai, there's a story that one time he was given a cold drink of water to drink, and so he took it in his hand. And as he took it, he felt unconscious and the cup fell to the ground and perhaps broke and, you know, the water spilled out. And when he came back to his senses, , Imam Ghazali is writing, , it was said to him, , what happened to you, oh Abu Saeed, what happened? Qala, Hassan al-Basri said, , I remembered the wish, the one wish of the people of Hellfire, when they will say to the people of Jannah, that just pour to us these people of Jahannam when they're gonna say the people of Jannah just pour down on us a little bit of water or something that Allah has gifted you with blessed you with from the blessings of paradise the people of Jannah will be calling out and he goes when I just got a sip of water I just suddenly thought what are they gonna be saying that day and he either was filled with so much fear that that glass of water made him go unconscious Right? Or he was filled with so much joy that this is what the people of paradise will be having. And this is why he went unconscious. To show why? To show, again, that why is Imam al Ghazali bringing this here? Because how do you get there into that, right? Except that you fear about your deeds. The only reason he feared that is because he feared the deeds that he had. And Imam Ghazali continues, If just knowledge alone was enough for you, then you wouldn't need any works beside it. La kana nida, halmin sa'ilin, halmin mustaghfilin, halmin ta'ibin dhayaan, bila fa'idah. If you didn't need any work at all, you just needed knowledge, then the divine call, is there anyone asking, is there anyone asking forgiveness, is there anyone making tawbah, would have been without any purpose whatsoever. What is Imam Ghazali referring to? Imam Ghazali is referring to the hadith of the Prophet , narrated in Sahih al Bukhari, . The Prophet said that our Lord blessed and exalted be He descends every night to the sky of this world when there is only one third of the night remaining saying and let's put up the slide Allah says in the last third of every night is anyone calling on me so that I might respond Is anyone asking of me so I might give to them? Is anyone seeking forgiveness so I can forgive them? This is what Allah comes down and says in the last third of every single night. Now, the student of knowledge often misses the point of the Hadith. They start saying, Can Allah descend? What does it mean? Is it literal? Is that what are the Sifat of Allah? And different groups start to argue amongst each other on the first word, yanzil, asking what is the nuzul of Allah? And that has its place in Aqeedah, Allah exalted and transcendent above any type of spatiality and physicality. But do we listen to the second part or the point of the whole hadith? If we missed the point of the Hadith, the whole point is when Allah is coming down figuratively to the nearest sky and asking these questions, what are we doing at this time? That should be the question that we're asking. And so this is the reason why Imam Ghazali is saying, if knowledge was enough, then why would Allah ask that in the last third of the night? Why would Allah ask that in the last third of the night? It means you wouldn't need to know. if Allah is calling if Allah is asking forgiveness because knowledge is enough knowledge saved you so this is why Imam al-Ghazali is saying that there would be no benefit in Allah asking if it wasn't a time for Amal because that is a time that you wake up right and that is a time that the hadith is saying wake up and call to Allah wake up and ask Allah for forgiveness wake up and pray to Allah right even even even if we can two rakahs And let's all make that, for myself and everyone else, let's make that our homework. Before we get to the next section, in which Imam al-Ghazali speaks about tahajjud and these things, let's make that our homework, to try to work on and ask Allah to give us a share of this, inshaAllah. Because again, this is an application to what we're learning. And Imam al-Ghazali is gonna get into an entire section. And it is said, Waruya an jamaal mina sahaba, and it is narrated from a group of the companions May Allah be pleased with them ... ... Abdullah ibn Abbas ... ... Ibn Abbas was mentioned in front of the Rasul and actually what they say was there are reports about it being Ibn Omar because Ibn Abbas was very young at the time during the lifetime of the prophet but we hear this report about Ibn Umar who knows best we you know but he was asked about and the prophet said what a wonderful man he is because Ibn Umar was among the of the sahaba of having the most knowledge of the sahaba very close to the sunnah of the prophet the most The closest in following the Sunnah of the Prophet out of all the Sahaba was considered Abdullah ibn Umar , the son of Umar . And so he was asked about him. He said, what a wonderful man he is if he only stood a little bit to pray at night, right? And then it is actually said after that in the Hadith, even though Imam Ghazal doesn't mention it, that when Abdul Ibn overheard that he only slept for a short portion of the night thereafter for the rest of his life for the rest of his life because the Hadith is implying you can be very good but did you do action you know in this case the most noble of actions is waking up in the night and calling to Allah worshiping Allah and no one else is there and looking so the Prophet is saying showing that you could be very good have a lot of knowledge follow the Sunnah but combine that with some action right and it is said that the prophet said to a man from among his companions oh so and so do not do not increase or have too much sleep at night because too much sleeping like too much rest at night will leave the rest or the sleeper poor on the day of judgment. Why? Because you had a whole long night and you didn't even take any advantage to remember Allah in any time. And for someone who can't do that at the end of the night, then before they go to sleep, make some part of our night for Allah even if it's just a small portion. We do that and we try to maintain that and try to ask Allah for more. Make shukr for what we do and try to ask Allah for more. Not taking on more than we can chew. but just enough so that we can fulfill our duties during the day and move towards Allah in the night and the day, InshaAllah. InshaAllah we'll stop there, the next section is speaking about a bit more about Qiyamul Layl or Tahajjud and so InshaAllah we have some homework as well to do for all of us, myself first and foremost. InshaAllahu Alaihi Wasallam, we'll just take any questions if there are any questions you can put them up on the chat or if there are any questions from the floor. That's a really good question. How much sleep at night? Honestly, that goes back to a few things, right? Number one, first of all, everyone's gonna say something different about this. I've heard, even from my own teacher, the advice changed over years because It really depends. Everybody is different. Everybody, everybody, everybody is different. Some people can do on very little sleep and it's normal for them. And Allah has just given them a blessing. where they can function at a very high level of functionality with very little sleep. And it doesn't seem to affect their health or anything like that, at least in the immediate term. And so a person like that, they can do that. But for most of us, we need to get enough sleep for our health, for our brain function, for our emotional regulation. lack of sleep leads to a lot a lot of things including all kinds of different issues you know on a mental physical level and so yes the early Muslims they talked a lot about sacrificing sleep in order to worship and do different things but they're also that we can say that their their their bodies were a lot stronger than ours they were very hardy I mean someone who can someone who can regularly pray for more like half the night or something is not like someone, not like most of us today. Right. We would be pretty, pretty, you know, devastated, you know, the next morning at work or you have children, you need to give attention to, you can't be like nodding off all the time. So it really depends on how much your body needs get enough. They do advise of course, like seven to eight hours. It could be split up throughout the day as well. That's one of the recommendations for people who need sleep. Get seven to eight hours. You don't want to also get a deficit of sleep. We're sleeping less and less as a civilization over the years because of the drug that we all take called light. Before light and the screens and stuff like that was there. We used to go to sleep lights out basically after Isha and now do we do that? Do we do lights out after Isha and then we're up before dawn so our schedules have kind of shifted. And so we can try to mitigate that. If you're nodding off during the day, if you have a quiet moment, I was told that that's a sign that you need more sleep. So we should try to get more sleep because we need to reinforce our health to do good things for Allah . So when we, as Madhu bin Jabal said, I pray to hajjid, but I also sleep. And I I expect from my sleep the same reward that I expect from my worship because I'm doing it for Allah. So getting enough sleep for Allah, there's nothing wrong with that. It's not the excessive sleep that we would say is talked about here. But it's a sleep that you need to do well to thank Allah for your body. That's a haq on your body. Prophet said, verily your eye has a right over you, your jassad has a right over you. your spouse has a right over you may Allah cause us to fulfill all the rights of the things that he's given us first and foremost his rights any other questions okay yeah you can um you can um ask them to stay on after the um yeah after the lesson inshallah we can or you can get you can send them an e-mail or get their e-mail get their e-mail they can get their they can send their e-mail to you or or vice versa Yeah, okay, so if there are no more questions, inshallah. JazakAllah Khairan, see you all next week. And please do participate on the forum, because the forum is where we can get a lot of reflections going and trade different tips and kind of like share different news about how we're doing. JazakAllah Khairan, wassalallahu alayhi wa salamu alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatum.
