Bismillahir Rahmanir Raheem Alhamdulillahi Rabbil Alameen Wa SallAllahu Ala Saida Muhammadu Ala Ali He Wa Sahbi Yajma'een Subhanakala Ailmala Na illama Alamtana Inda Kantal Alimul Hakeem Allahumma Alimna Mayan Fa'una Wan Fa'ana Bimatu Alimuna Wa Zidnum in Fadli Kainuna Ta'alima Inna Ka'ala Quli Shayin Qadir Wa SallAllahu Ala Saida Muhammadu Ali He Wa Sahbi Wasalam Asalamu Alaikum Wa Rahmatullahu Barakatu Alhamdulillah Alhamdulillah, Allah has given us the health and the blessings and the tawfik to sit here again. Alhamdulillah to explore Imam Abuhammad al-Ghazali's Ayuhalwalad, his epistle, his letter to his senior student, a letter of advice that was originally written in Persian and then translated into Arabic. And alhamdulillah, that letter of advice that we have called advice for living right or dear beloved son others call it oh son oh child oh youth alhamdulillah as we explored last class we did an introduction last class this class will be getting into a bit more of the substance of what Imam al-Ghazali was talking about so we left off alhamdulillah last class at the part where he's getting into prophetic advice right and so let's just kind of recap let's just recap a little bit from from where we left off. The last thing that Imam al-Ghazali said as he began to, he said his first Ayuhalwalad. So in the letter, there are a bunch, they're basically paragraphs and each paragraph is beginning with Ayuhalwalad, oh child, oh son, Ayuhalwalad, Ayuhalwalad. So the first Ayuhalwalad addressed to his student, it basically said that you're asking me for advice and however the the place where you take advice from is from the treasure trove of messenger and messengerhood and prophethood. Who? Rasool . And so this, he's in doing this, why is he saying, and he's saying basically like that's better than my. advice I can give you. And he's also saying, if you hear this advice from the Sunnah and you know it, then you don't need my advice, right? And he's saying, and if you don't know this advice that I'm gonna give you and convey from the Prophet , then he asked, then what have you been studying all these years? Because if you've been in Ilm all these years and yet you have not taken the guidance of the Prophet . then in reality the question is, what were you doing all that time? How can we go through years of training or studying and pursuit of knowledge and then say we don't know what the Rasul said to us? So it's something to remember. So alhamdulillah, but there is also a lot of indication when he begins like this. And we didn't take this up last class, but let me begin with this, right? Why did he say that, what he said? Number one, it shows his humility, right? It shows the humility of such a great scholar. He's being asked for advice and he's saying, Let me give you what the Prophet has said, or something that's come from the prophetic tradition. And he's showing you that an aalim always grounds his speech, his entire thought and speech and teaching and life is grounded in the Quran and the Sunnah. Right? So he doesn't just be, okay, can I get some advice? Okay, let me just give you advice. They'll always try to begin with the Quran and the Hadith. And he's also will try to avoid his own words in favor of the words of the Prophet . Now, it doesn't mean that he's not gonna give his own advice at all, right? I mean, for example, we are in our day and age, we have a lot of self-help, we've got a lot of advice, advice books, advice columns, SubhanAllah, it seems like everyone on Facebook is there to give advice. And the fact that all that advice exists, but the greatest advice exists in the Hadith of the Prophet in the Sunnah of Prophet . It really it really behooves us to look into that into the Sunnah before we before we start taking advice from others And that doesn't mean however that you don't speak from yourself, but you make it something that describes or is a in it is unpacking the Sunnah the Quran the Sunnah, so alhamdulillah so Imam al-Ghazali begins with his next Ayuhulwalat and he says Ayuhulwalat min jumlatima nasahabi rasoolullahi sallallahu alaihi wasallam ala ummatihi qaluhu alaihi salam he says from among O O son from the general of the general things that the messenger of Allah has advised his ummah with is the following saying alamtu a radullahi ta'ala anil abd ishti ghaluhu bimala yanihi And so he says that the sign that Allah Most High is turning away from a servant is that he busies him, he busies that servant with that which does not concern him. Okay, let's take this again. The sign that Allah Most High is turning away from a servant is that he busies the servant, Allah makes that servant distracted or taken up with other things. In what kind of things? That which does not concern the servant. It's not in that servant's ultimate interest or in the servant's, you could say, in their benefit, neither in this world or in the next world. And then he continues and he says, And the next statement that he reads, is he writes is a man for whom indeed a man for whom a moment in his life is wasted or a person for whom a moment in their life is wasted in other than what they were created for i.e worship they are likely to have a sorrow for their sorrowful regrets grow long so those people who spend a moment of their life doing other than what they were created for right and what are we created for to worship Allah And that person will have regrets in their life because of that turning away. And we'll walk through these, we'll read them first and then walk through them a little bit more. And then the next statement is, whoever crosses 40 years of age, and his good is not dominant over his bad. then let him prepare for Hellfire right so these are you know heavy pieces of advice first of all going back to the first piece of advice the first thing is that when Allah says or sorry when they say that Allah turns away right the sign that Allah has turned away from a servant what does it mean it could mean that Allah does not have mercy on that person, Allah does not guide that person, Allah is not pleased with that person. All of those things come into this idea of of Allah from the servant, right? And what it tells us as well, or that their duas will not be as accepted, for example, that Allah will not guide that person down. Why? Because they chose to use their life for other than what is pleasing to Allah . Right? And when Allah turns away from that servant, what does it mean to busy that servant? It doesn't mean that they're completely turned away from Allah. It doesn't mean that all they do is they don't remember Allah. No, it means that most of their time, if Allah wants to turn away from a servant, then that servant does not have that guidance at that point in time. Right? And how does that happen? By them using most of their time in what distracts them. So, you know, subhanAllah, may Allah forgive us. How many of us are, you know, have had or have the challenge of scrolling endlessly, you know, in social media. It's designed to make us do that, right? But that's one thing that is, it's . It's that thing which does not concern one, right? And what about, for example, getting into gossip, listening to other people's business. Or what did they say? What did that person say? What are they doing? Getting into other people's business. Even reading things, it could be Mubah, it could be even Halal. But it's just a lot of Halal that does not concern you. Now, interestingly, all the three of these statements. Although Imam al-Ghazali says that we're going to take the Nasihah from the Messenger of Allah , they're not actually prophetic hadith according to the Muhabqiqeen who searched for the Asanid. But rather they say that they can trace it back or they cannot trace it back with an Isnad to the Prophet . It doesn't mean it's not a hadith. Rather, it's traced back to the first one, traced to one of the early ascetics, Gharif al-Yamani, and there basically, there is, however, a parallel hadith that is authentic, that we do have, that gives, acts as a support for this statement. And what is that? It is a hadith, a well-known hadith, right, Min Hosn al-Sam al-Mari'i tarkuhuma ala yanihi, that from the beautiful aspect of a person's Islam, is that they turn away from that which does not concern one. So it's really kind of like the flip side statement. It's the flip side statement. So someone who wants to practice a beautiful Islam, they should mind their business. That's what it basically means. You don't stick your nose into this and look into this because someone who does that might actually end up in getting into a matter that they wish that they did not get into, whether it is you know, following a threat of backbiting on social media, right? And then learning things about someone that you wish you didn't see, or you wish you didn't hear about, you know, bad things about a person. And that's one way that your heart gets darkened by that, right? It could be something such as, you know, anything, even letting our gazes, you know, grow, you know, go beyond what is good for us, right? And then our eyes may end up looking at something And so all of these things are being busied from that which is not concerned one, because the more one is with khairullah, with other than Allah, they could be in the halal, but there's more likelihood of being stuck into something haram, falling into a sin. Whereas if a person's heart and mind and soul are busy with Allah, or at least if not busy with Allah explicitly, this here does not mean you're always making dhikr or you're always in a religious religious devotion necessarily that which concerns you is what also things in your dunya right in what we call the dunya so for example earning earning a livelihood that's that concerns me being with my family spending time with them so it's it's not this idea that if you're not focusing on doing dhikr all the time or something that you're with other than Allah no it's something in which you have no benefit whether in this world or the next world, right? That's the conditions of that. Because we know as well, Allah says in the Quran, that indeed the hearing and the eyes and the gaze, right, and the heart, all of those things will be asked about that person, they will be asked about those things. So the believer and moreover, the student of knowledge is very, very protective over the things that they allow into their eyes, into their ears, and especially into their hearts. And those, the eyes and the ears are the windows into one's heart and one's soul. So they try to protect those things. And as well, the next statement And okay, well, this is another question that comes up quite often, right? So let's deal with this question from at the outset. Many people ask, why is it that hadiths were brought in for example, or in this work, we've seen a hadith that either are not, they're called prophetic hadith, but perhaps they're not traceable to Isnad or they're very weak. So why is there a presence of weak hadiths or hadiths that are attributed to the Prophet but they may be the saying of someone else? The first thing to remember is this, right? And there are a number of different scholarly responses to this. The first thing is what we see as a weak hadith. may not actually be a weak hadith in the Ijtihad of other scholars, right? So if we go by certain scholars, they can say this is a weak chain. There could be other chains and scholars have done work to show that either many of the hadiths, for example, in Ihya al-Mudin, either they have alternate chains, which would make them more acceptable, or for example, they have different versions, right? Or there are other hadiths that, as we said, like in Husn al-Sam al-Ma'i, there are hadiths that support the same meaning, but they're said in a reverse manner. In other words, they mean the same thing, but the wording and how it's conveyed is different. The other possibility is that Imam al-Ghazali, he is a master faqih, and he is a master usuli. And so they know exactly how to establish proof and they know exactly what the criterion of using proofs from the Quran and Sunnah are. And so when you see Imam al-Ghazali bring a hadith that somebody might say that Isnad is weak, it is because there is a permission in the field of hadith to use a weaker hadith, right? As long as you don't know that, as long as you are not, as long as it's not clearly fabricated, but It is permitted to use a weak hadith in the field of Fadal Al-Amal and in Fadal Al-Amal It means the virtues of good deeds. So you're encouraging someone to do good deeds And so in in like for example, if you're encouraging to do good deeds Then you are allowed to use a weaker hadith because a weak hadith does not mean that it is fabricated, right? So we can't just rule it out as a saying of the prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam And so, in this case, Imam Ghazali is not actually trying to prove a fiqh point he's not establishing Aqeedah, so therefore the rules are a little bit relaxed in terms of how they. the stringency in terms of narrating the authenticity of the hadith. And the final thing, another thought could be as well that there's a difference between saying that this is an actual hadith of the prophet or saying that it is from a prophetic tradition. So when we say prophetic advice, in its nature, it is prophetic because every single teaching that we really have in Islam that is true and that is good and it comes from even spiritual insights or other scholars, in the end, where do we glean it from? Where do we glean our guidance from? We take it from the prophet and so perhaps what is being said is that as prophetic advice it means it's in line with the sunnah of the prophet and the prophetic teaching and Allah knows best but there are different responses and people ask that question often and it's one of the things that are given as a challenge to the writings of some of the scholars that why was it why were the hadiths like this and that shouldn't turn anyone off and the later scholars as well did ample work to be able to verify the hadiths and they will point out in the footnotes in their works and basically point out exactly where a hadith might be weak or authentic or even fabricated and so alhamdulillah that work is done for us and we don't have to worry about not benefiting from the rest of the work. So the other, so that takes care of that question hopefully for the whole course inshallah. And then the other statement was a man for whom a moment in his life is wasted in other than what he was created for worship is likely to have his sorrowful regrets grow long. And why is that? Because at the end of the day, we know that Allah says, Allah says in the Quran that and I have not created jinn or mankind except that they should worship me. And so if the purpose of our creation is to worship Allah then any moment that we really spend away from that is really a regret that we will have right now the question comes up here right the question comes up here What about the fact that we all get distracted from Allah? I mean, you know, most of us enjoy to, you know, enjoy some recreation. We laugh with our families. You know, we do all kinds of things that are not always in the line of worship or remembering Allah. And it doesn't seem like we're doing what we've been created for. We have to remember the story of Hanvala, , one of the great companions who was martyred quite early on, you know, within the prophetic period. But at one time, he was very close to the Prophet . He came out of his house. We know many of us know the story. He came out of his house saying that I am a hypocrite. Hamdullah is a hypocrite, right? And he met Abu Bakr there along the way. And he was going to see the Prophet and Abu Bakr asked him, what are you saying? And he says, I'm a hypocrite. And then Abu Bakr, he explained to Abu Bakr why he felt that. Then Abu Bakr said, then I would be hypocrite in that case. Now he's not, he's just, we'll get to why. So he goes to the Prophet and he says, he's afraid that I'm a hypocrite. The Prophet says, why are you saying that? Why do you say that? To the new meaning, he says, because when I'm with you, O Rasulullah, and when I'm sitting with you, and you know, it's as though You know, you're talking about heaven and hell, it's as though we can see them. It's as though we can see heaven and hell. And when we go back to our homes, we start to play with our wives and our children, and we get busy with our things in our house and our livelihoods, and we get so distracted, we forget that state that we were in. And the prophet said to the near meaning that you would not be able to continue in the same state as you are with me. outside when you're not with me, you wouldn't be able to maintain that the same way that you are when we're together and when you're away from me, don't think that just 'cause you have a loss of that feeling of closeness with Allah or the consciousness of Allah, when you're going from a spiritual to a kind of mundane place, because he said, but rather he said, if you could actually maintain that level, he told Alhamdulillah to the near meaning that the angels would come down and you would see them and they would want to shake your hand in the streets and in your bed because a person of that level who can stay at the level that they were with the prophet stay like that all the time that person is a very saintly holy person you know so the prophet is reassuring and he said A time for this and a time for that and this is the important thing to remember that in this piece of advice When you say wasted in other than what he was created for, it doesn't mean that you will never turn away, that you'll never be distracted, right? It means that because even being distracted and having recreation, spending time with your family, working out for your health, reading something, cooling the mind and just having some recreation, eating something you like. It doesn't mean it's for other than what Allah created you for when you, and especially if you do it in the halal, number one, and you do it for the sake of Allah . This is why we say bismillah before we eat. This is why we say bismillah before we do a lot of things, to bring Allah's mention and remembrance back in there. So, and things that are halal and things that are far for you to do, like take care of your family, go to work, these things. So that is where, don't think that just because you take a second away that you are now a hypocrite or that you have wasted your life. And the other thing is the spiritual scholars used to say that of the things that the masters of spirituality, the people of the heart, the Sufis, the people of Tazghia, that they feared the most was actually the idea of thought. meaning that a moment of your life passes and you miss the good deed that could have been done in that moment. Because in any single moment that we're in, even when you're driving in a car, even when you're in a bathroom, even when you're doing whatever, there's always something you can do to worship a lot in that moment. It's not just the times of prayer or in Ramadan, but you could make an intention, you could remember Allah, you could just do something good in that moment, even just to turn your heart and remember Allah at that time. That is a worship that you can do and feel that second that you have there and make it something that lasts forever. Otherwise, in a lot of our hours and weeks and nights and days and months are just passing, passing, passing. This is where that question comes in. And it is said also, there is a prophetic hadith mentioned in al-Bayhaqi and Tabarani. Mentioned Bayhaqi and Tabarani, that the Prophet said, That there is no regret that the people of Paradise will have. except a moment in their life that passed over them in which they did not remember Allah ta'ala in, right? Because they say, oh, you know, they won't have any regrets. You're in Jannah, your worries are over and everything is good. All the problems are gone. However, we know that every good deed that we do in this life, we would see the reward of it in the hereafter, or that it would raise the station of the person in the hereafter. And so the only thing that they would say is, oh man, I wish I would have used more of the seconds of my life to get more in Jannah, because it's permanent, right? So that would be the only regret, right? And so, and Allah , sorry, Ali , there is a saying of his that says, , that glad tidings to that person whose own faults have busied them from seeing the faults of others so rather than looking at the faults of others they're looking at their own faults right they're busied with themselves and they don't want to see what other people are doing wrong and and glad tidings to that person who sticks to his house meaning stay stays home minds his business and he eats his own food whatever he has he's happy with it and he cries over his sins Right? So he has busied himself in a productive thing. What? Right? Right? And other people are not harmed by them. So other people are relaxing. So when you're busy in good, the other good thing about that is that other people, you're not harming them. So alhamdulillah, may Allah make us realize these things. And they also say that it is very commonly written in the books of Islamic spirituality that every single breath that we have is a valuable jewel. It is a jewel, every breath that we take is a valuable jewel. And subhanAllah, and so every single one of those jewels, it is a priceless jewel because how much can you put a price on one single breath? At the end of our lives, even to take another breath, how much would we give just to take more breath? So it is such a valuable thing, even a single breath that once it goes, there's no bringing that breath back and there's no replacing it either, no money or anything like that. And that is the capital that we have, the breaths of our lives, right? The breaths that we have in our time. And through these breaths, we either earn eternal felicity, right? Or we spend these breaths of ours and get perdition, eternal perdition. by doing wrong and wronging ourselves and so if we did that that would be that would be ripping ourselves off because you buy something you buy something harmful with the most valuable possession that you own right so may Allah saved us and that is the greatest loss that one can have and the last statement is whoever crosses 40 years of age and his good is not dominant over his bad let him prepare for hellfire what does it mean first of all Good is not dominant over bad. It means that your good deeds are not more than your bad deeds, right? So someone who's bad deeds, just imagine how many things you do. If someone's bad deeds are dominant over their good deeds, this is a big problem. This is a big problem. And what do we mean by the bad deeds? We mean that they're doing kabirah, the major sins, which we talk about on Sundays, or they're persisting in minor sins, 'cause we know that persisting in a minor sin over and over and over right without making tawbah that that becomes a major sin because it's like as if you think you don't care that you're doing a sin and so you keep doing it over and over and it becomes like a kabirah right and it is narrated from the prophet now it is narrated that the prophet said that there is no such thing as a small sin if you keep repeating it so it's not small if you just think it's not bad and you keep repeating because it shows that you don't care about what Allah says about that if you know it's something small and you're just still doing it not making Tawba for it and there is no there is no big sin major sin in the face of Istighfar so when you subhanAllah when you make Tawba to Allah right when you look at the no matter how bad that sin is how grave and big that sin is when you compare it to how great Allah's mercy is and his forgiveness That sin, that big sin can become small. It seems it's like small, right? That's why the Prophet said, O Allah, your forgiveness is more expansive than my sins, right? To the near meaning and mercy from you, I have more hope in that than in my own good deeds. And on the other hand, if you think that a deed is an evil is like a wrong deed is minor, So who cares, I'm just doing this minor thing. Then it's like a big sin because look who you are offending when you look at the right of Allah Subhanahu wa Ta'ala, there's really no such thing as a small sin. When you look at the right of Allah, but when you look at the mercy of Allah, there's almost no such thing as a major sin in that sense, in a hyperbole. And then Imam Ghazali says, Wafi, oops. and in this piece of advice this advice is sufficient for the people of knowledge subhanAllah these three things that he said a person of knowledge like he's speaking to a scholar he's saying that there would be it would be enough for them why because they know what Imam Ghazali is getting at but interestingly even though he said it's enough right it's still only the beginning it's still only like the first like second paragraph of his of his letter so he continues But it's a very, very profound statement to say that this is actually enough for someone who understands, they can stop right here. If they just practice on what he said, guarding your moments in your life, don't get into what doesn't concern you. And watch as you age, watch how your age is going. So when crossing 40, some of the Salaf, the early pious predecessors, Ibn Rajab al-Hanbali states, Rahmat alayh, that some of the Salaf used to retire at the age of 40. They used to say that, 40 you're a Shab and we're doing the hadith on youth on Sunday as well. That up to 40, you're considered a youth. And after 40, they would say, that's it, we retire. And they would actually give their life up for Ibadah from 40 'cause they're preparing to meet Allah. Even from 40, like we retire at 65 or whatever. They're saying from 40, that's it, we leave the Dunya. Retire meaning that you leave off all of those desires and ambitions and you just apply yourself to Allah. And Imam al-Ghazali continues, right? Ayuhal walat, oh son, oh dear beloved son, or oh child. That advice is easy to give. Advice is easy, but accepting it is difficult, right? So it could mean one of two things, either it means that generally it's so easy to give advice and accepting is difficult or he's saying that what I've just told you the advice I've just given you it's easy to to hear and say but it is it is very difficult to follow why is that this advice that I gave you very difficult to follow I mean any of us who apply it will see because in the taste of that person who is following their desires the person who's addicted to their desires when that person tastes that advice it tastes bitter to them why because sins and forbidden things have become beloved to their hearts right because because prohibited things are beloved in the hearts of people who follow their desires people who follow their desires all the time they've become They become addicted to certain feelings or certain fancies. And for them, the idea of letting it go, why would I, why do I want to do that? Right? I don't want to do that. So it could be, it could be that bad TV show that, you know, it's just a person's binge watching. They're just addicted to that TV show. And you know that the scenes in that TV show are really not something that are conducive to your, your dean. especially not someone who's trying to seek the love of Allah. And they're putting all these other things inside their hearts that are not from that, right? Okay, if something happens and a person slips or falls, then we make Tobah, then one would make Tobah. But at this point, a person who is given this advice and they still, they don't wanna accept it because they don't wanna let go of their desires, this is why the advice is very bitter for them. Well, and who is this directed to? Listen to this. He says, this applies, the fact that you don't want to let go of your desire, so you find this advice bitter. This applies especially for the student of formalistic knowledge, SubhanAllah. Imam Ghazali right there, he takes aim. at what he calls the student of, it's not outward knowledge necessarily, it's formalistic knowledge. And in it is a huge, there's a huge warning in that, right? Because at the end of the day, what do we mean, first of all, that the formalistic student of knowledge, it could mean the student who merely studies things because merely studies things to learn and not to act upon. So a formalistic student, you know, for example, one of my teachers was telling me about a person in his Islamic university who has some of the amazing chains of narration in Hadith, very short chains of narration. And they go around collecting different Ijazas from different sheikhs. And, you know, one of my Hadith teacher was amazed at this person, has so many Ijazas in Hadith, and he goes and perhaps he does not even pray. So this is because the field has just become formalistic for them, completely outward without any intention of action, right? And everyone knows best. And, or it could be that a person is pursuing to begin with a field of knowledge that has no benefit at all. Like, why are you studying this? What good is in it? It's my hobby, I like it. A person spending, we're talking about the student of knowledge who spends all their time in like some, in like, let's say a useless debate or details that will not benefit them, but they're just getting more and more, for example, a lot of times, you know, people spend time in study heresies. They like to get into all of the wrong things that all the other sects are saying, but without any intention, without any clear intention, it's just more gathering facts, gathering facts, and oh, this is interesting, oh, that's interesting, right? And they spend all of their lives serving that rather than seeking knowledge that will benefit them, right? And And, or it could be someone who their knowledge, they have that knowledge of Deen, but it's not benefiting them because they're not applying it deeply or they're only focusing on outward aspects of knowledge, but they haven't purified their hearts. Someone who knows a lot of technical subjects in Islam, a lot of the technical sciences, but their character is not representative of a Muslim. Somebody who wants to know, you know, they're masters of Arabic language, or they're masters of, they've got all the details of this, but their interactions with other people, or their private relationship with Allah is not there, right? And so Ibn al-Ghazali says, especially for the formalistic student of knowledge, who is only busy, right? who is only busy with their own merit and the advantages of this world so what happens starts happening is their own merit meaning pumping themselves up self promotion and getting ahead of your colleagues even though you're in a religious field so these are the types of people who will find this advice very difficult he's saying people who are only in it to get ahead vis-a-vis other people and or to earn the advantages of this world, getting a better position, getting better pay, getting more likes and followers on social media. Not for Allah's sake, not to do something for Allah's sake, but for the sake of one's own self. They see their ilm as a career. They see their as a career and the same way that people get ahead in their careers, they want to get ahead in Deen for those reasons. And part of the problem, right? And so he thinks that his, they think the knowledge alone will save them. They believe that it's because as long as I know a lot, That will save me, right? And they don't need to do works. So they say, I'm a scholar. I'm an alim. I'm a student of knowledge. I know more than you or the other person. And they think, they think, and therefore we don't need to do work. And this is a big problem, right? And then they think that knowledge alone will be the means to their salvation. and something that will get him out of all of the problems of the next life you know when you stand to give recompense and he says I don't need to do good deeds and this he's saying is the beliefs of the philosophers now Imam Ghazali knows what he's saying because he was a master you know of Islamic Aqeeda and he studied philosophy deeply and perhaps here as the commentator mentioned is that it's not philosophy as a whole but it's a branch of philosophy for half like material materialist or naturalist or a type of philosophy which basically favored the idea that the intelligence in a person is like a virtue and so therefore he's saying that this idea that The smarter you are as a human being, you're more advanced and therefore you're more, the greater the intellect and IQ, that you're a better version of a human being, so you're good. And actually this is not just an ancient misconception. Even today, right? How often do we judge someone's value by how intelligent they are? And how often do we judge someone's respect by how many degrees they've done and which titles and letters they have behind their names? Whether it's in any field, we do this, religious or non-religious. But this idea that since when do we say that just having knowledge alone gives you any merit? This is what Imam Al-Ghazali is saying, and he's one of the greatest Imams of his time. So for him to be saying this, there's a big thing. And in our time, there is a huge amount of brain worship. Parents are encouraged from a very early age to start training their kids. You have baby Einstein. You have all these different things where to train your children to become like Einstein. But we never say how to train your child to have better morals. You have lots of tuition centers. You've got lots of homeschooling curricula. You've got lots of activities. I mean, even from like one or two years of age, There are toys to like, get, improve brain function with children so that they start reading faster, learning faster. This is all brain worship because it says that my brain and what I know is the source of my virtue and my worth in this life. And this is actually absolutely not true. In fact, we even have to watch out. Some of us come from cultures. that have a lot of brain worship in them. So, you know, getting educated and becoming the doctor, engineer, lawyer, whatever it is, that's like, you had to do it in your family, right? This happens in many Asian cultures. I don't know about other cultures as well, I'm sure. But at least from my background, it was like, you know, it doesn't matter what you're like in your personality, in your morality, in your private life. If you are an accomplished professional, and you have a high level of degrees or you're intelligent, you can sound intelligent, then you're a good person and you've done well in life, right? And the students of knowledge, particularly those of us from those backgrounds, we have to even be careful, right? When we get into this field of Islamic knowledge, because did we actually question ourselves? Like, okay, maybe for example, I wasn't able to become the things that my community or my parents wanted. I wasn't able to get to the level of intellectual achievement. Therefore, I'm just gonna do it now in Islamic knowledge 'cause it's easier or because it gives a different type of respect. And this is what we have to be very careful about. Anybody who's on a path to knowledge or studying Deen, right? That because knowledge is respected because it takes one to Allah, people respect the student of knowledge, Muslims with good hearts. So we have to keep questioning our intention, why am I doing this, what am I doing it for? And then Imam Al-Ghazali says, SubhanAllah, he says, SubhanAllah al-adheem, the fact that these same scholars or these students of knowledge are thinking like irreligious people and worshiping the brain and thinking that their ill will save them, you know, glory be to Allah. ... Glory be to Allah that these people, these students of knowledge, of formalistic knowledge, don't even have this measure of knowledge. They don't even know this much. They don't even know this much. He said they don't even know this much subhanAllah. That the more knowledge they gain that they do not act on, the more knowledge they gain that they do not act on, the more that knowledge becomes a proof against them. The more knowledge that they keep gaining and gaining and gaining and gaining, that they don't intend to act on or act on, that the proof against them with Allah gets heavier and heavier and heavier. And so this is why we need to stop and ask ourselves, right? Let's say we take all these classes, are we applying what we learn? If not, if not, then there's one of two things that we should do. Either we slow down and we say that I will practice and put into practice what I'm learning. So I'm not learning something that's way beyond my ability or my level. Or sometimes we learn something and we can't apply it to our lives right away. So when you study a Fick book. There's so many chapters that you just don't know how to apply because they apply to a different context or a set of rulings that don't necessarily always obtain in the modern world, or the application of it takes a more nuanced study of that. So the way to go through pieces of knowledge that you may not be able to apply is not to just go over them, but to say, oh Allah, If I was in that situation, I would worship you by following this piece of knowledge. Oh Allah, if this ancient sect that I'm learning about in Aqeedah, you know, that is not around anymore, what's my benefit? If this fitna came to the Muslims again, Allah would worship you by believing the right thing and helping others believe the right thing, right? So through intention as well, and so therefore everything we start learning, we don't leave it without practice or an intention to practice, and Allah knows best. and and then he continues that um just as the prophet said in nashad the nasi in nashad the nasi alaban yamu qiyama alimun alam yan fa'ahullahu be almihim excuse me that the prophet said if we can just pull up the slides It is narrated that the Prophet said, the person who will receive the worst punishment out of everyone on the day of judgment will be the scholar whom Allah does not cause to benefit through his knowledge. So that person who studied all these things, right, and other people benefited, but they themselves did not benefit from that knowledge, subhanallah. They learned all of these things, and this is the greatest loss. Why? Because that person is telling others, you know, what to do. That person is telling others, this is the way to be. And in fact, another version, you know, in Ibn Asakir, in another narration of this hadith, it goes like this, that it is narrated that the Prophet said, to the near meaning, , that the most intense of people in terms of sadness and loss on the day of judgment is that a person for whom seeking knowledge was possible in the world but he did not seek it and a man he knew a vast amount of knowledge And the people who benefited, who listened to him benefited from it, but he didn't even benefit from his knowledge. So it's another version of this hadith. And Allah says in the Quran, Oh you who believe, why do you say things that you do not do? It is such a big dislike or a hate, Allah hates so much that you say things that you do not do. This is a type of hypocrisy. And so Imam Al-Hazali is giving his student these advices that don't be like this. Do not be one of these scholars or students of knowledge who merely gather formalistic knowledge and then don't have anything to show for it. And then he continues, waruyah waruyah anna Junaiden qaddasallahu ruhahu al-aziz Ruyah filmanami baalamoutihi faqidalahu malkhabaruyah abalqasim it is narrated that it is narrated that Junaid al-Baghdadi may Allah sanctify his secret that great knower of Allah a huge scholar Big, big walli of Allah, alhamdulillah, Junaid al-Baghdadi who combined the way of Sharia, and he combined the way of Tazkiyah, the way of Haqiqah, he combined all those things into one. And he had a path that was firmly on the Quran and the Sunnah, and also was a master of spirituality. It is narrated that Junaid al-Baghdadi qaddas salahu surahu was seen in a dream. And we know the Prophet although dreams are not a proof, In Islam, they're not in evidence, but we know from in Sahih al-Bukhari, the Prophet says that dreams are 146th, true dreams are 146th of prophethood, right? So we know that the prophethood, prophecy is gone now, prophecy is gone. However, there are still true dreams to give us indications and Isharat. So when the books of spirituality and the books of Islam speak about so-and-so was seen in a dream, it doesn't mean that's a proof, but it means that there's a strong indication in it that we can benefit from and we'll see how we benefit from this. And so Ib Junaid al-Baghdadi was seen in a dream after his passing. And it was said to him, it was asked, O Abu Qasim, what's the news? Meaning, how are you faring now in the hereafter? Or you've gone on into the barzakh and into the next life. How are you doing there? Right? And so he said, Qal tahat al ibarat, wafaniyat al-ishaarat, man fa'atna illa raka'atani, or raka'at fi jofal layl, or raka'anaha fi jofal layl, subhanAllah. He said, he was seen in a dream and he was asked, this huge scholar, what became of you what's your what's your what's the news about Qasim he said all the textual quotations have vanished and all the spiritual expressions are gone and nothing benefited us except the few rakas that we used to pray in the middle of the night subhanAllah this is Imam Junaid who spent an entire lifetime and and he's talking about two different things here He says all the Ibarat, the textual quotations, all of the Ilm in the books, that's all gone. He says, what happened with whole lifetime of it? It's not there anymore. It's not there. And what about all the spiritual expression? So somebody said, okay, fine. Let's not talk about the formal kind of outward knowledge. Let's talk about the inward knowledge, spirituality, everything that we're saying now from Imam al-Ghazali, these are all the Isharat and these are all these discourses of how to improve ourselves, how to get closer to Allah. He says, and all the spiritual expressions are gone. All the sayings of the great masters of spirituality, all that is gone. And he's saying, and nothing benefited us except for a few small rakas. There's just two different ways it's narrated. It could be rakatani or a few rakas, or it could be a few small rakas that we used to pray in the middle of the night. This is the only thing that benefited us. And if this is what Imam Abu Qasim Junaid al-Raghdadi, if this is what he's reporting, then what is our state? And so we know from this, that it's not always what we learn and what we talk about. So you could have the biggest, as my Sheikh says, the Sufi library, all the translated works, all the Misbah has hung up, all the best perfumes, and you can have all a library full of fiqh books, and if we don't apply it, it doesn't benefit us. But those things that we do, why is it that those small rakas in the middle of the night, even though Imam Junaid is probably up all night, he was describing his worship as small, few rakas because it's a place where nobody sees one except Allah and no one's worried about showing off to anybody else. No one's worried about what others will think of them. Right. And so perhaps this is why he said that in the dream and Allah knows best. And then, um, and then he, uh, he goes to the next, uh, uh, the next paragraph but what we'll do is we'll take a three minute like a two or three minute break inshallah we'll take a stretch and we will come back inshallah to finish off this section in which the last piece of advice the ayahu alwalad for this class inshallah so take a two-minute break inshallah bismillah rahim alhamdulillahi rabbilalaminu sallallahu alaihi wasabi ajmain hamdulillah hope you had a good break a little stretch so in the next uh paragraph Imam al-Ghazali begins again ayuhal walad oh child dear child do not be bankrupt of good deeds and do not be empty of spiritual states and uh and and have certainty and have certainty that the sorry do not be empty of spiritual states by believing that knowledge alone will take you by the hand and so in this section and even in the following sections you'll notice that Imam al-Ghazali spends a lot of time focusing on this idea basically when you see an expert in their fields advising another expert and they're spending a lot of time on one topic, you can tell that that's a big issue in their field because an expert doesn't advise another expert except at the most critical levels. And so you're going to ask yourself, why is it that he's bringing example after example and proving it from this way and that way? because it means a lot and it's such a common problem, right? So he says, oh dear child, do not be empty of good deeds. What does that mean? What it means is, bankrupt of good deeds means you have nothing to show, but it could be in two different ways as well. It could mean that you just didn't do any works. You just were gaining knowledge all the time and you had no time for action. Or the other thing it could mean, the prophet asked his companions one day in the in a hadith and he said and it was asked he asked the prophet asked them do you know do you all know who the bankrupt person is and they responded ya rasulullah that it's someone who doesn't have any money nor any possessions that's a bankrupt person and the prophet said the bankrupt person the muflis of my ummah to the near meaning are those people who will come on the day of judgment with their salawat with their som with their zakat, they have deeds, right? But he insulted this person and he cheated that person. He accused that person falsely to the near meaning. He took this person's money wrongly and he hit this person. He shed the blood of this person, he hit this person. So he did all of these bad things to other people, even though he had a lot of worship, so he was applying knowledge, but he was also violating it at the same time. And so he did all these things to these people. And so his Allah took his good deeds away and gave it to those people as a recompense that he wronged. And when the good deeds ran out, when those good deeds ran out, Allah gave the bad deeds of those people that he wronged and gave it to him. And so he ended up being bankrupt, nothing to show Allah . And this is hadith in Muslim and Tirmidhi. And so this is what it means by being bankrupt. Either you don't do them or you do so many things opposite to them that it's just as if you didn't do any good at all. And that doesn't mean, however, we don't do good if we are doing wrong, rather we try to outdo, right? We try to outdo our wrongs. And one of my teachers, he once paused when he was reading, I think it was chapter of Atikaf. in the book Ikhtiyar, it was Mukhtar of the Ikhtiyar, and our teacher, he stopped and he said, you know, he says the common people, he was saying, the person who's never studied anything, he goes, why is it that they seem to put into practice some of these acts of worship more than the student of knowledge? He was saying when you go to the masjid at the end of Ramadan, he said, Where are the students of knowledge in a-tikaf? SubhanAllah. He says, where are those ? In a-tikaf. Their classes are usually out, right? They usually don't have classes many times. And he was saying, it's strange to him. He's saying, how come the common person who has not studied anything and they don't know, they just do what their Imam has told them. And the Imam said, this is a good deed to do or they just heard that Rasul used to do it, that's it, that's for them. That is all the proof they need. And yet another person who has studied all the laws of etikaf, all the details of it, when does it break? He can answer all the questions for those people when they're stuck in their etikaf. And yet those people themselves, he was giving us an example. It doesn't mean everyone's able to do etikaf, but he was saying . He goes telling us, oh students, if you people don't practice this deen, who's supposed to practice it then, others? And he was talking about this as well, that you have people who express Islam in their lives. Normal people who express Islam in their lives, they haven't studied anything. Where are the expressions of Islam, even the outward expressions of Islam? Why is it that they seem to shy away from expressing outwardly their Islam in other contexts? So that's a very profound statement and do not be and don't be empty of spiritual states. What does it mean here when he's saying spiritual states? A spiritual state, the Akhwal, it's something that comes without trying. It's the way a person is. It is a state of their heart. And it's not something they put on or that they're acting to do. It's because a certain type of action has had such a good effect or company or something else from the blessings of Allah has impacted the way that person is. And so therefore they have a state in which more good deeds come out of that. And as the spiritual masters say, it's one thing to do a lot of good works, that's amazing. But if you fix your haal, if you work on that, getting a haal with Allah, meaning a state with Allah where you are either in a state of shukr to Allah, you're in a state of tawba to Allah, you're in a state of humility to Allah, in fear of Allah, in love with Allah. When a person tries to acquire a good state with Allah, it's only from Allah, but then many, many deeds come out of one state. So a person can try not to lie, a person can try to speak well, but if they just fix their heart and they're a truthful person, then they'll always say the truth, right? So Ibn alhazali is saying, neither in your actions nor in your states do not be empty of those things. And when a state, as the spiritual master, the commentator says, that when a person does, practices deeds, That's how it brings states. And when states become firm in a person, they come and they go, they come and they go, they come and they go, as their spirituality dips and rises. And if it becomes solid, then they call it a maqam or a station. And many deeds come out of that as well. So may Allah open the way for us to understand what's being said. And believing that only knowledge alone can take you by the hand, , now he's gonna give two examples. And we'll end with this, inshAllah. So Imam al-Ghazali is going to bring two metaphors of why you need to have knowledge and action. And you'll notice, subhanAllah, Imam al-Ghazali was a brilliant scholar of logic as well, a master of debate, a master of rhetoric. And so Imam al-Ghazali is going to bring two examples. using the mind and logic but also using in a metaphorical fashion to prove to illustrate this so he says mithalu an example of how knowledge alone is not enough if a person okay he says if imagine there was a human being in a desert and they had 10 swords 10 Indian swords okay because Indian swords were considered the best ones at the time that's why the prophet was praised by the poet in his lifetime, he was called an Indian sort. I'm not just saying that because my parents are from India, alhamdulillah. But he's trying to say that even if you had the best means and weapons and you had other weapons and that person was brave and all of a sudden, and they were a person of war, but all of a sudden a ferocious, dangerous lion pounced upon them. What do you think? Do you think those weapons themselves would be able to defend that man if he did not use the weapon and pick it up and defend himself? So you see, if you had all the weapons to fight a ferocious lion, would the weapons fight the lion themselves? Can you say that my sword is on the ground, it's going to start swinging itself at the line? Or would you have to strike? Right? And then... He continues, and then Imam Ghazali continues, he says, And it's understood that a weapon would not be able to defend you except by moving it around and by striking with it. And so just like that, even if a person read, a man or a woman read, a hundred thousand points of knowledge, and he learned all those hundred thousand points of knowledge and he did not act on it right he would not it would not benefit except through action and then he gives the other metaphor second metaphor so this metaphor is in an outward sense he has this knowledge how does he act with it in in an outward sense. And the other one is ... If this man, right, had a high temperature, he was to suffer from a fever, and he had jaundice, okay, his treatment ... Sorry, it's a tongue twister, well ... and so if he if he were to suffer from fever and jaundice his treatment would be with Oximel and barley water okay two ingredients and he would not be cured unless he used them right unless he used those two things he would not be cured so it shows as well Imam Ghazali understood how medicine worked okay he wasn't shy to say He knew that he wasn't shy to say that in medicine, this works because he knows that this is a causal relationship in the world. So some people, for example, they believe, oh no, you can't say that this would actually help and this would, 'cause he knows everything's in the control of Allah . So just a side point that he respects how medicine works like all scholars should. And so he's giving the example of how if a person was sick and they needed two medicines, they would not get healthy unless they took those medicines. And the medicine alone on the counter would not cure him of that disease. And so in the same way, if a person has all this knowledge on the shelf, on the counter, so to speak, and they have diseases in their hearts, if they don't take that knowledge and internalize it, then they will not be cured of the diseases of their hearts. This is why he's saying to end, he's saying that action must accompany knowledge. And so he ends with a Persian couplet. Okay, so sorry, we have, right? He ends with a Persian couplet. And it's interesting because as we said, he was Persian in his background, his original native language was Persian. In fact, they say he wrote this letter itself in Farsi, right? And so they quote this line and they left it untranslated in Arabic, but the commentators translated. And we'll translate it, I guess, we won't translate it in the Arabic, and I'm not gonna even attempt to read Farsi 'cause I don't read Farsi. But he ends this section with this couplet that I've tried to render in a poetic form. I can try, Bismillah. And even if you measured out 2,000 cups of wine, and even if you measured out 2,000 cups of wine, you won't get drunk if every time you're offered you decline. Okay. So I mean, we understand the example. Even if there were 2000 cups of wine that you poured out and you measured, you don't get drunk by looking at them. It's only by tasting it. So the thing is, and this is now someone will say, Oh, I know that's gonna rub someone the wrong way. And say, Why is he using an example of wine? Why is he using that as the couplet? So there's a few things that Imam Ghazali is saying. The example that that illustrates to us is that obviously you need to be able to do something in order to feel what it feels to implement that action. You don't get the, you know, because people drink wine, obviously it's haram, they drink wine in order to feel that drunkness, inebriation, intoxication. And so he's saying here that as a commentator say, you don't taste the sweetness of faith except till you try it, right? until you try implementing your faith, how? So the believer doesn't feel the sweetness of faith except by fulfilling the rights over them that are due to Allah and Allah's creation. And this is the application of knowledge. That's why I put that couplet in the background picture of a library, 'cause that's the whole point. It's not the point about wine and the cups. The point is, if you have all those books and you don't read them, you won't taste the sweetness of the deen. That knowledge won't benefit you. And also it shows that some people also ask like, well, why they might wonder, and I used to wonder this as well, like, oh my gosh, how come they used the example of wine? In their time, it's obviously so obvious that this is something that is haram in Islam, but it's almost as if to say to the people of the worldly, sinful worldly people, that you think you are feeling a high when you drink these things. You think that you're feeling a high when you indulge in these things, but the high and the boost and the sweetness of Iman and love of Allah is far greater than anything that you're experiencing with your wine and your weed and your substances. And this is what they're almost saying we can use your examples, right? Not because they're high examples, but because it's so much greater it's almost like mocking the people who to use that so hamdulillah so in the end this is the this is the advice that imam al ghazali gives and in the next section in the next section now somebody might ask as well bring up a an objection and say wait but don't we know that in alim the virtue of a scholar like a real scholar uh you know what is it um who's the hadith man alfi Abidin that in alim, a single alim is stronger on the shaitaan than a 1000 devout worshipers, right? Or the near meaning of the narration, I don't want to quote it exactly. But just say, that you're saying that knowledge doesn't have a merit in itself. But look, there's so many different ways Allah says that the only people who truly fear Allah are the ulama, the ones who know. So they're gonna say, well, no, this is not true because, you know, knowledge does have a respect and it's true. So Allah praises knowledge, the Prophet praises knowledge, but the point of that knowledge is that it must equal actions. This is what they're saying, that the level of knowledge is the highest, why? Because the most basic knowledge that you need to know is that You need to implement it in order to benefit from it. So what they're saying is, why is it, this is such a deception of shaitan that you could learn every point of knowledge, but not learn the most basic first step of knowledge. And this is what tells you that the shaitan can come to some people through wine, others through their lusts. And for the student of knowledge, the shaitan can come through the knowledge itself to make one forget that the knowledge is a means to reach Allah and not the end in itself. And that the more knowledge one gains is not the more virtuous one is, but the more one practices what they know is how one gets closer and is more virtuous in the eyes of Allah. And the less one practices and the more they know or the more they know and the less they practice is a greater proof against them on the day of judgment. And so therefore, right, the Jahan who knew very little and practice very little is better the ignorant person is better than the alim who knew a lot and practiced the same amount as that ignorant person. That person is gonna get reward and may attain felicity. And this other person who knew more and didn't do much, they may actually get punishment for that. So may Allah save us, inshallah, from that and make our intentions pure for his sake, inshallah, and cause us to see him in the things that we learn and apply the things that we hear from Imam al-Ghazali Make us sincere for his sake, insha'Allah, full of actions and states that bring about the pleasure and the nearness and love of Allah (Swallahu Alaihi Wasallam).
