Bismillahir Rahmanir Raheem, Alhamdulillahir Abdul Alameen, Wa Sallallahu Ala Sayyidna Muhammad, Ala Alihi Wa Sahbi Jmaeen, Subhana Kala Ailmalana ilma Alamtana Inna Kantal Alimul Hakeem, Wa Humma Alimna Mahan Fa'una, Wan Fa'alabimaatu Alimuna, Wazidna Minfadlika 'Imna Lata Alima, Inna Ka'ala Kulishayn Qadir, Wa Sallallallahu Alaihi Wa Sallam Alaikum Wa Rahmatullahi Wabarakatu, Alhamdulillah. We are here in the 10th Lesson of Imam Al-Ghazali's Ayyuh Al-Walat, Dear Beloved Son Explained: Advice for Living Right. And the title of this lesson is Four Things to Desist From. If you remember Imam Al-Ghazali, let's just retrace our steps. We're coming to the end of the letter now of Imam Al-Ghazali to one of his senior students who he refers to as dear son, dear child. And even though he must be a senior person. And he's saying the last portion of this letter is that let me give you eight pieces of advice. And he says, take it from me so that your knowledge will not be a proof against you on the day of judgment. And he's saying you should do four things and leave four things. And then he says the fourth that I'm going to start with what you should leave. And as you, if you remember, he said, and of the four things that you should leave, what was the first advice that he gave, right? The first thing, the first advice that he gave, if you remember, is do not debate anyone on any matter as much as you are able to, if you remember that. Do not debate anyone on any matter as much as you're able to. And then we talked a little bit about the aspect of debate. What does it do? It brings a lot of blameworthy character traits out, showing off envy, pride, enmity, things like this. And then, you know, what happens is, however, there is a need sometimes to debate. He's not saying never, ever, ever debate. He's just saying, stay away from it as much as you can. However, there are conditions if you want to debate for the sake of haq the truth then it's lawful and the sign of true debate if you remember was that you don't care whether the truth is revealed on your tongue or on the tongue of your opponent what you would call the opponent but shouldn't be an opponent really right and then also you that you prefer private inquiry more than public inquiry so instead of saying all right me versus you you know truth versus falsehood let's Let's debate this in front of a stadium full of people. You would much rather solve the problem by saying, give me a phone call. Let's go for coffee. Let's talk about it. You know why? Because there's more it's more likely to have sincerity when you disagree with someone and it's a private disagreement, you're more likely to be to stay within sincerity. And so refraining from debate, right? Let's let's see from where Imam Ghazali picks picks up. So we left off And he said, he said, Isma, he says, listen, listen up. He says, I'm gonna mention something on this first point still, this first idea of do not debate, I'm gonna mention a very beneficial thing to you. He says that asking a question, Asking a question about problematic issues is like showing a sickness of the heart to the doctor. Whenever you ask a question to a scholar about, it must be problematic. When they mean problematic, they don't mean it's a problem. They mean when you problematize something, you're wondering how to solve a certain discrepancy in your mind or you don't know something and you're bringing that to someone who knows. When you ask a question to a scholar, It's like revealing a sickness of yours to a doctor. That's why you go to visit a doctor when you're sick, right? And so the same thing, you go to a scholar, you go and you send in a question or you go to ask them a question. And when that scholar is answering you, right? The answer from that scholar is just like a doctor working towards curing a sickness. So that doctor gets to work. in helping you and trying to treat you then he says he says and know this and just know this that ignorant people have a sickness of the heart right it's like a person who has a sickness of the heart so he likens ignorance to a sickness and scholars are like doctors meaning they're the ones who are supposed to treat that situation Right? Why? Because ignorance is likened to a sickness because when a person is ignorant of something, then they have some type of, they may have some type of deficiency in their dean or in their understanding or in how they give rights to other people. And so it's a problematic situation. Just like, and we're talking about ignorance of things that matter, i.e. dean. We're not talking about like ignorance like you haven't memorized all of the presidents of the United States, it's okay to know, it's good to know. But we're talking about, that's not gonna harm you, whether you know it or you don't know it. Alhamdulillah, if you know history and these things, but what harms you is when you don't know something that will benefit you in the Akhirah or something that you have to do for the Akhirah. So then he continues and he says, so the scholars, so let's look at this analogy and throughout this analogy, He's going to keep using ignorance as a sickness and the questioner as like a patient and the scholar like a doctor. He says, He says the deficient scholar, a deficient scholar is not adept at treating hearts. Okay, now what is he saying here? He's trying to explain something to this scholar that not just everyone who ascribes himself to knowledge or has studied a little bit is necessarily ready to answer every type of question. And what he's saying is this is a situation where just like a doctor who has not, let's say, completed their studies, they haven't trained yet fully, they haven't specialized in something, you wouldn't trust them to treat a case or a disease or medicate or operate in a situation that they don't know how to deal with. Why? Because it's likely, right, it's likely that they'll make a mistake. So your podiatrist might know things about feet and stuff, but you wouldn't ask him to do dental surgery on you. and this why this is why that that that doctor would not be the one capable of doing that and so a deficient scholar is not adept at treating hearts they don't know but there's also not only is there the metaphor but there's also the idea you know they have a saying they have a saying and I forgive me if I butcher the Urdu uh the Urdu but it's um is it what is it Neem Hakim Khatra Ajan and Neem Molvi Khatra Iman have you heard this no so That's what I think it is. Basically it's saying that a half-baked doctor is a threat to your life, but a half-baked scholar is a threat to your Iman. So a scholar that is not able to treat you and you ask them a question that implies that you need something, then that is even more dangerous. than going to a doctor that doesn't know what they're doing. And no one would ever want to go to a doctor that doesn't know what they're doing, right? So, and subhanAllah, even worse than going to a professional sometimes, it's funny, is if you had a serious issue, you wouldn't just treat yourself through Google, right? Like we shouldn't be. And yet for religious reasons, people do it all the time. They do it all the time, they can ask a scholar very easily And yet when it comes to asking a question, you'll see somebody on like a Reddit forum or something like that, or like Instagram kind of like put it out there, what's the answer to this question? When there are sources to be able to go to, even on the internet, right? Obviously we have answers, we have the answer service and so on. And the other thing that might happen is that a scholar who is not adept at treating hearts An answer from such a person may do a number of things to the patient, right, and to the ignorant person. First of all, the information may just be wrong, in which case they practice incorrect way, and they then are not able to, they don't know that part of their dean, they do something wrong for their entire lives or something like that, fasting wrong, praying wrong, whatever it is. Or they give them an answer that is not according to the hikmah that you should be using with that person and so this taalib, this question, this sail gets a response but it actually gives them a doubt or they can't understand or they can't understand it or the other thing is that it's given the answer is given in such a way that they get waswasa so this happens as well one of the things that our teacher taught us is that when someone who is not capable or fit to be a teacher teaches because of some reason, the sign of it is that the students have waswasa, the students get a waswasa. And so this is what Imam Al-Ghazali is talking about and some of the things may Allah save us and protect us from being on either side of this issue. And then he says, He goes, but a complete scholar. A perfect scholar does not treat every sick patient. So a deficient scholar cannot treat people properly, but a complete scholar doesn't even try to treat everyone properly. That's interesting. Why wouldn't he try to treat everyone? Rather, the complete scholar, they only treat those in whom he hopes will accept or in who he hopes will accept the treatment and improvement so he's like you know what you know he's looking at this this this patient and he's saying can I can I do this job a surgeon is looking saying can I do the operation if I can do it I will take the case I will take it otherwise the doctor says I'm not gonna take the case I can't do it right or he's saying for whatever reason you're not gonna it's not gonna work on you and this is why he's saying then he says .......... So he says if the illness is terminal or incurable or like the illness makes you incapacitated and he says and and it's intreatable it's incurable then the intelligent doctor from his own sense and experience will not get busy in medicating this person because it is a waste of his lifetime to do so. So if he knows, look, this is not going to help. The disease is such that it's not going to go away. Same with the ignorance. A scholar that knows that my answering this person's questions my teaching this person is not gonna remove their ignorance for what for a number of reasons then Imam Ghazali is saying if you a complete scholar doesn't even try because his lifetime is valuable and he doesn't try to waste his lifetime in something that's not going to produce a result for Allah sake because not just about intention intention of course you'll get that reward but he's also looking at what the effective outcome is and if he does not think that there's gonna be a good resolution then there's no point in even answering that person's question that's very interesting people often think oh no answer everyone's question no matter what work with them see and in reality there are different types of people as Imam al-Ghazali will speak about and this has not this is not an issue of sincerity necessarily but it's in whether that person really wants to accept the answer or not many times so Imam al-Ghazali continues he says then know this that the disease of ignorance is of four types so the disease of ignorance is of four different types the first type of the first type of patient right The first type of person who has the disease of ignorance will respond to treatment that's the first of the four, and the other three types of people, so one type of person will accept the treatment, meaning it'll work on them. then three types of people the treatment will not work on them meaning you answer one person's question they will understand they will benefit from that knowledge there are three types of people however that will not even if you answer their question they will not benefit from that answer they will not get it what is it as for that person who does not respond to the treatment meaning accept understand the answer. The first of those three types of people who you cannot, they will not get the right answer. They will not understand it. The first type of person who doesn't respond is when their questions or their objections are from envy or hatred. Right? And this is a serious thing. If someone comes asking a question, what does that mean? there's someone this happens sometimes a they see a scholar from a different group or a scholar that disagrees with their their you know opinion or they see a scholar that's getting its popular or very pious or very knowledgeable and I'm because they're that scholars were different group of people a different community a different whatever or does not agree with one's own scholar what do they do Sometimes they get a jealousy for that person or they get a hatred for that person, dislike. I don't like, and you hear this, unfortunately. Some people talk bad about shakes on the internet. And it's like, what did he do to you? Oh, he's so popular on YouTube. I don't know why people listen to him. Okay, what's your problem? Oh, he believes in this is this and it's some difference of opinion or something like that. He got something wrong. or you know he's doing well giving dawah people are listening he's effective with youth whatever it is and because of one thing he said people hate on him right or her and they don't like that or it could be envy so between two teachers or two scholars they see that this person is gaining popularity their circle is growing bigger than this person's circle how come this guy got an invite to the conference I didn't get an invite to that conference This person is speaking at this place and look, every night when they do their live sessions on YouTube or whatever it is live, they get this many viewers, I get this many viewers. This person is a good speaker. So the shaitaan plays and envy comes into the person's heart and then they speak bad about them to their students and their followers or their social media followers and then they say, they kind of throw questions out there and the common person takes those questions starts attacking that scholar that's envy and hatred these things are very very serious problems in our ummah what is envy envy is when you feel some people say jealousy as well it's when you see a blessing that another person has and you wish that they lost that blessing or you wish they lost it and that you get it for yourself. Or you wish that you got it, right? So there's different definitions of envy, but the bottom line is basically you want them to lose their blessing and you want to gain the blessing for yourself. That's usually what it is, right? And this often becomes, what does this come out of? Pride, because you think that you deserve something, like why didn't I get that? You know, am I any less than that person? aren't I a good speaker, aren't I a good whatever and so you become jealous of that person, this scholar who's doing really well and so people have this kind of rivalry that happens or a person gets jealous and says how come this scholar is from this group that we don't agree with and they're doing so well, they're giving good dawah, the kind of people becoming Muslim to them and our group no one's doing that or our Masjid is empty, their Masjid is full or whatever it is. Their videos are so cool, our videos are not cool, whatever it is and this envy, where does it go back to? This envy is the very first thing that occurred, one of the first sins tied up with pride, which is from Iblis. Shaitaan, the first thing he did was he envied Adam . He did not want to bow down to Adam . Why? Because he was jealous of him. How did Allah respect and honor him so much and I didn't get this honor how come Allah wants me to bow down to him so it's pride and it's envy same thing happened with with Cain and Abel Habil and Kabil why why that is the children of Adam when one brother killed the other brother it was envy how come Allah accepted your sacrifice and did not accept my sacrifice so he killed it again envy the first murders subhanallah And Shaitaan is still envious of us. Why? He's insanely jealous of us because Allah loves us. Because at the end of the day he knows that us human beings as imperfect as we are and as broken as we are, as pathetic as we can be, Allah gives us a chance to get to know him and to love him. Allah gives sent us a messenger that he loved more than anything else. And so there's an importance and that if we have a mountain of sins, we make Tawba and Allah will forgive us. And Shaitaan is jealous because he can't get that. His sin is now, that's it. He's not gonna make Tawba and he knows where he's destined. and so this envy is something that eats up people and this envy is something that is a serious problem even in the state of knowledge and religion don't think that you get into religion and envy and jealousy stop now this is different as the commentators say from emulation what they call hipta hipta is when you see a person with a good quality and you want to be like that person but you don't want that person to lose their blessing so this person recites good Quran I want to recite Quran well. I don't want them to... I don't want them to stop. Or this person studied knowledge. I want to study knowledge too. This person gives charity. I want to do the same. So that's permissible. That's fine. Because that's how we have racing towards good deeds and competing for good qualities. But so when this person's question, so what they'll do now is there's a scholar, like it's a talk, and then at the end, they're kind of like the disruptor. put up a question. And it's a question, it's a controversial question to get the other person in trouble, to get the scholar in trouble. They're just asking the question to record the answer, to go out in front of everybody and say, see what this sheikh says, see, or trap them. So this is when the question is from envy or hatred. And you're just trying to trip the person up. You don't have any reason why you want that question to be answered in an honest way, right? So that type of person, so then he says, Uh.......... He says even every single time that you respond to that type of person, the jealous or hateful person, the hater, every time you respond to that person with the best answer, you gave him the most brilliant answer. The most eloquent answer and the most crystal clear Islamic response through knowledge, the person, they don't accept it. It just increases them more in anger and in jealousy. So even with the best response, they only increase in anger and envy. And you see this. In fact, the more that you answer such a person's questions, the more feisty they become, the more they want to plan the next question and debate you and then take you down and try to nitpick that question and to the point where they even start to make up things, lies and stuff like that and trip you up. You see this and it's really nasty. People disagreeing with each other for some type of hasad or something like that and then they start picking on each other's Arabic language skills. What does that have to do with the answer? Someone made a mistake in Arabic. Oh, how do you even know that when you can't even say this properly? or they'll say oh yeah well don't you associate with so and so who associates with so and so and that's you know so you're canceled or something silly like this so it only even with the best response you will never win and you will never educate that person and so Imam al-Ghazali says then the best thing to do basically the solution do not busy yourself in responding right and Allah says in the Quran I'm just going to jump ahead a little bit, right? And the best thing is not to busy yourself in responding. And you should turn away from that person. Turn away from that person. And leave him with his illness. Let that person be with their ignorance. ......... and Allah says so turn away from they who turn away from our remembrance Allah says turn away from those people who turn away from our dhikr and do not and they do not want anything except this worldly life meaning they're not asking you to get closer to Allah and his rasool they're just asking you to debate you people come up to you this is the classic case come up to you and well is this the one no okay there's another one coming up and it'll apply to that one So then the other one is, then Imam Ghazali says, so when you do not respond to this person, someone might think, oh no, I didn't do my job and it's not true. Imam Ghazali is telling this scholar, don't waste your time with haters and your enviers. The best thing you can do is not respond to those people. So Sheikh, what do you think about this, this, this? So what do you think about this, this, this on social media to get them in trouble, to bring out an answer that no one's gonna like? You just stay silent and you forget it. And turn away and leave that person with their illness. You leave them because their illness is not just their ignorance, it's the disease they have in their heart. What can you do for that person if they don't even know they have that? A scholar can't take that out from a person's heart. A scholar can't take out envy or hate from a person's heart, right? Imam al-Ghazali quotes the lines that is attributed to Abdullah Ibn Mubarak in the Diwan of Abdullah Ibn Mubarak, Rahmat Alayhi, the great Tabi'i scholar, Illah adaawataman aadhaqa anhasali qullul adaawati qadturoja isaalatuha. It's a type of, I tried to make a rhyming translation, for each type of enmity there is a remedy, except when they hate due to envy and jealousy. Except if you switch it around, except when they hate due to envy and jealousy, for every type of enmity, there is a remedy. So you can solve every type of hate, you can solve it. If it's hate because of some fight, you can cause peace between people. Let me give you a gift, let me say sorry, cause love between, if it's an enmity because of a real misunderstanding, just clarify it. If it's a person who hates you because of envy, what are you going to do? Are you going to give away your knowledge to that person? How are you going to do that? Are you going to give them the thing that they're jealous about? No. You're not going to do that. So you can't get rid of it. Then Imam Al-Ghazali continues. And the one who envies That person, by every single thing he says and acts on of that envy, every biting remark, every act to send out bad information or forward embarrassing mistakes about that person, everything they do and say, they just light a fire. They are fueling a fire inside the field of their own good deeds, right? Because Allah, and they're not even aware of it. Why? Kamaqala Rasulullahi Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam because the prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam the messenger of Allah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam peace be upon him said Al-hasadu ya kul al-hasanati kamatak kulunnaru hatab Al-hasadu al-hasadu ya kul al-hasanat jealousy or envy consumes good deeds just as a fire consumes firewood right so The same way, what happens when you have like dried firewood and tinder and you put a match inside it, just in a very short time, you see everything start to get consumed in flames. Envy is like that, consumes one's good deeds. If a person has jealousy, now we're not talking about, we're not talking about like a jealousy that comes up in the heart, you can't really help it, but you don't act on it. And you certainly don't accept it. You say, that's jealousy. You see in your heart, you know, a lady sees another lady, she's more prettier than I am. A guy sees another guy, he's driving a nicer car. His wife is prettier than my wife, or something like that, something silly. Or you know, even student of knowledge sees student of knowledge. This person studied more than me. You know, you feel like, oh, you know, and then you say, shut up Nafs, that's Hasid, stop it. That type of person, neither are they acting on it, nor are they speaking it, nor are they affirming it or encouraging it. So that type of jealousy and envy, you put it down. But what about the envy that's allowed to just go and burn? Just like a match inside a bunch of straw and firewood. Just eventually just spreads everywhere and all of your, and the better, the person that you envy, the better they do. The more followers they get, the more talks they give, the whatever it is, in Dean, the more the envy consumes you. And this is why it's so strange, but scholars almost name any scholar and they have enemies. The first time I heard this, I was really shocked when I, you know, one of the major scholars, senior scholars, when he mentioned my enemies XYZ, and I was like, your enemies? Most normal people don't have enemies, right? Like, do you have enemies? You know, we don't have enemies, right? Normal, especially religious people usually don't have enemies. But I realized what was happening. He didn't mean that there's enmity on both sides. It means that just because he's in the place where he is, just because she is effective in community work, just because he is knowledgeable indeed, has a lot of students, whatever it is, they have enemies who are just following around and they're only purpose in life seems to be to seek and destroy that person. They'll stand outside of their talks, handing out flyers, why this person is deviant. They will troll them on social media, things like that. And it's kind of died down now quite a bit. It used to be quite all the rage a number of years ago. I think it still might happen on social media. Allah protect us and so this is why this envy consumes good deeds as fire consumes firewood according to the prophet because you start doing all this all these things that that nullify all the good things that you've done and this is why Imam Abu Ghazali says so he says and then he says and now getting back to the second type of person how do they respond to this disease? the second type of person who does not respond to the disease so the first type of person who doesn't respond to the disease meaning they do not accept the answer is because of envy and hatred the third type the person whose illness or affliction is because of foolishness stupidity and he or she cannot respond to treatment. What is an example of that? What is an example of that? So, for example, let's read on a little bit, okay? He says that the second type of person The illness that they have of ignorance is caused by idiocies, they're foolish. And they will not accept treatment, just like Isa says, according to this, what he's saying is that it is said that Jesus said, I have been, he goes, I have not been, I should put it this way, I was not incapable of bringing the dead back to life. But I was incapable of curing a foolish person. Allahu Alaam about the authenticity of that statement. But Isa was well known for a miracle that Allah gave him by the power of Allah, that there was a, you know, is it Lazarus I believe? You know, that they say he was a person who had died and he came back to life. That was one of the mujaz of Isa . He's saying, I can do that. That miracle Allah gave me to bring the dead back to life. But I cannot cure a foolish person of their foolishness. Meaning it's very difficult to get rid of it. And so what Imam Ghazali is implying is that you can try, if a person is foolish and they're asking questions, then it will be very easy to remove that foolishness, even if it's not out of hate or envy. And this could be, what type of person is foolish, when they mean foolish, it could be a man who actually has spent some time seeking knowledge, but it's only a very little time. This person spends a little bit of time seeking knowledge. and they learn something of the rational sciences and the transmitted revelatory sciences, Aqeeda, Fiqh and Hadith, Quran, Tafsir, Mantiq, different sciences. So they spent a little time doing Talib al-Alm. Mind you, this is the person who they're calling Ahmaq. And yet still, they don't have sense and understanding of what the deen is about, or they don't have a knowledge about this. So this person who studied very little, now he has a smattering of knowledge, and he doesn't have much knowledge, but he thinks that whatever he finds objectionable, whatever he cannot understand, that the big alim also cannot understand. Whatever I object to, it doesn't make sense to me. So obviously it doesn't make sense to everybody else too. So even the big scholar, he's not ready to listen to the answer from the big scholar. He just, you know, look, this doesn't make sense to me. And no matter what you say, it doesn't make sense to you either. So you're telling the sheikh that you don't know what you're talking about, basically. And so if he isn't even able to reflect to this extent that hey, maybe this is a difficult question for me, maybe I have this confusion, maybe this Shaykh or Shaykh does not have this confusion, maybe they can help me. If he can't even see to that extent, then his question is foolishness. It's foolishness. He goes, then it is fitting that you should also not respond to a foolish person's questions. Rather, the appropriate response to a foolish person is to remain silent. Ignore it. Ignore it. So what is it? So do not respond. Their illness is foolishness. They spend very little time seeking knowledge. They get a little bit of it and then they think that what he finds problematic is also problematic for a great scholar. A scholar should not be bothered to respond to them. The best answer to a fool is silence. And you see this as well. Sometimes people do learn a little bit and then they become dismayed by something that doesn't make sense to them or they get swayed by, this happens, you know where? People who enter into, may Allah save us and protect us, they enter into polemical debates with like non-Muslims and atheists and Christian missionaries or whatever it is. And then they knew a little bit of Islam, but they didn't study Islam properly. They just had some internet knowledge of Islam. Now they can't debate this other person online or whatever, they got into it, they can't debate, so they lost, so they joined the other side. or they become a kind of like this kind of like reformist kind of warrior, you know, like, okay, this is what's wrong with Islam. And then they start opposing Muslims on any one point, you know, that doesn't fit in with their modern understanding of what should be or they just go completely 180 and start to attack Ullama. Oh, you know, you guys are all, you know, complicit with the, the global economic system or you guys all support tyrants or you guys all you know what and so they start painting these very broad brushes and think they think they know Islam now see Allah says this one ayah and then all the rest of the deen there's no context to it so they ask questions now they want to know the answer but the foolishness with which they're asking the question the way that their mind works that doesn't even think that this person could have another opinion they're not gonna accept the answer anyways. They're just too lost in their own foolishness. Ibn Al-Hazali is saying, don't bother with such a person. For example, or you have sometimes questions that people ask, people send questions that like, why do you want to know this? What benefit is there to you in this? because they kept on asking and asking and asking and they finally got to the point where this is why the prophet it is narrated in Bukhari and Muslim that he said people will continue asking and asking until they say this is the creation of Allah but who created Allah right whoever experienced let whoever experiences any portion of this doubt say Amen to Billah I believe in Allah and his messengers So the hadith is saying that people will continue to ask questions that are not beneficial. They get into things that are like, why do you care about this? Why do you need to know this? It's such a detail and it's just asking for the sake of asking. That's another thing you have. People just sending questions just for the sake of asking. They're just letting questions go. They're not thinking about this. Wait, is it a good question or a bad question? I have had teachers when I was younger I won't say which teacher. I asked the wrong, like a dumb question. And not like a dumb question where I really didn't know, but it's like, just think about it. And someone who's accustomed to, especially if you wanna try to show that you have a lot of questions and you ask a dumb question, sometimes the scholar will be like, did you think before you asked that question? Just put it together. Like, what are you saying even for yourself? So, I mean, that is something where, if you now get busy, in like figuring out like, I don't know, something like very, very, you know, where is the exact direction of this corner of the Kaaba pointing to or something like that, you know, things that are not gonna be beneficial to the person's practice at that time, you know. Then at that point, the best thing to do is to stay silent and don't respond to them. Why, because at the end of the day, you're not gonna cure them of their foolishness, Right? And neither are you gonna, you're gonna spend time researching and it's not gonna do anything good for you. The prophet actually is reported that in Bukhari al Muslim, that the prophet proscribed meaning forbade idle talk and asking too many questions and squandering well. At some point in time, did you know the prophet completely forbade his companions from asking questions? He just said no more questions. And this is why the companions used to like when a desert Arab used to come from outside Medina And they would come, they would ask all these basic questions. Now here's the interesting thing. His own companions, the Prophet , limited their questions. It wasn't like he was getting hounded by the companions to ask questions. He said, okay, no more questions. Meaning sometimes you have to stop a student right where they are and say, first understand the basics and then practice on what you know. Don't start asking this and this and this and this. And like someone who hasn't studied, you know, is already asking about like some high level Nahu question or poetry. They haven't studied and they want to go into the Hidayah, for example. It's not going to make sense. As someone just mentioned today, you answer a question for someone and then they send back a whole bunch of Arabic proofs on WhatsApp. It's like, can you read this and summarize and tell me if that supports your answer? You ask me a quick question, now you're sending me a whole bunch of Arabic quotes. I'm like, if you can read that, then you summarize and ask me what is your objection? If you can't read the proof, don't ask me to read the proof to your objection that you don't even know and then confirm whether I'm right or wrong. That's an example of a question where you just have to say, no, I'm not doing that. And then the person will realize, oh, okay, fine, I shouldn't have done that. If you cannot read the proofs or handle the proofs, then you shouldn't be asking about them, for example. And that's different than a sincere question that comes gradually and you know. But it's not even good for the seeker of knowledge to indulge that type of question to them because then they lose focus on what's most important. And the third type, where are we? So the third type is a person who seeks guidance. and he says however everything that that person they seek guidance but anything that they don't understand from the words of the major scholars the senior scholars he interprets in the light of his limited understanding so he interprets in his very narrow view however excuse me His question was actually for obtaining benefit. It was a sincere question. He had that question. However, however, but he does not have the level of intelligence. I mean, the word used is dimwitted, right? You don't put anybody down when you're talking to them, but sometimes they don't have the level of intelligence or understanding to be able to understand and grasp this question. says that is the third type of person that it is not fitting for you to get busy in trying to answer this person because answers what they mean is not just a verbal answer sometimes it takes research sometimes to answer one question you might be researching for hours and hours in the books going into the books You know, anybody who's done a research question, well no, it takes time. And so that time, that hour, hours or days of your life could have been spent doing something else rather than addressing a person who's not going to understand the answer, right? So do not answer that person. Just like the Prophet said, actually this is a narration that is ascribed to the collection of dailami. It's a weak chain. So it is attributed that the Prophet said, sorry, let's get into the slides here. So these are three types of people. And where are we? Yeah, it is narrated that the Prophet is attributed to have said, We, the community of the Prophets, that we, the community of prophets, have been ordered to address people according to the extent of their intellects. Now, you can understand the meaning of that. Meaning prophets were told to speak to people according to their level of understanding. Because this is a weak chain narration, the commentators bring two other narrations. Number one, Ali says, narrated by Umman Bukhari, speak to people about what they are familiar with, what they know. Would you like for Allah and His Messenger to be denied, i.e. if people heard something they hadn't heard before or they couldn't understand so they reject it? So don't go up to someone who is, let's say, they just became Muslim and they're like the ******** vegetarian. And then you start telling them about the meat eating habits of the Sahaba or something like that, and then you tell them something they can't handle at that time. and they reject Allah as messenger because they say no that's not true or you know you go to people with a hadith especially in modern times when when you have all these other ideologies because of liberalism and modernity quote unquote and these types of things and so you don't understand traditional values in some ways so you'd say something to someone they're not ready for it they're still stuck in a very very different paradigm and then because they say no that hadith couldn't be true or something like that why because it's not in the spirit spirit of, you know, it's not modern and it's not this and it's not that. So our Prophet couldn't have said it. So Ali is saying, do not tell people things that they're going to deny. Just tell them things that they know and understand. It's very important in our time especially. And Ibn Masud said, you never speak to a group of people about something that their intellects cannot understand, except that some of what you say is a fitna for some of them. Fitna, I didn't translate that, meaning you talk about something to people that they can't understand it, you know, it becomes a fitna for them. So people who, for example, let's say you have some, you know, often like young Muslims coming out of a very rough and tough neighborhood in a situation where they're like, let's say former gang members, you know, still kind of might be on like at risk youth. Violence is like something that was maybe they were around. And then you're gonna give them a bunch of narrations about war and about fighting and about this and about that, because that's gonna make a fitna for some of those people and lead them down a deviant path. Another example, for example, of like, you know, you wouldn't tell children certain things they're not ready to hear. So this is an example of someone who wants to ask a question, but they just wanna understand the answer. So like, I remember, you know, for example, my child once asked me, Baba, where's Allah? You know, I was like, uh, you know, I said, how do I answer that question, right? It's not exactly what Imam is talking about, but it's the same idea that whatever you say now is going, they're going to interpret it in their limited understanding. So I remember another father, a scholar who answered this question for their child. well, you know, and you're trying to say Allah is not confined to a place, Allah is above, he created the heavens and the earth and time and space, and all of a sudden it's like, so Baba, you're saying Allah is a smiling cloud, a happy cloud, or is he like a floating around? So this is the type of things that you're gonna start leading them down. And when I asked my Sheikh, how do I answer this question? Subhanallah, he says, just tell him he is with you wherever you are. I was like subhanAllah my Aqeedah student mind was trying to theologize the answer to my child and the Sheikh just said no that's not the answer you give at that time you just say Allah is with you wherever you are then after that the way that Aqeedah when you study Aqeedah and you grow older you start realizing oh okay fine because you lead them away from the anthropomorphic view but you also don't bring them down deep theology, you know, or even essential theology when they're not ready for it. So this is what Imam Ghazali is trying to say, you don't bring things up to people that they're not ready to understand, right? Now as for the four, going back to the first type, so he mentions the three, then he goes back to the first type. Who is that? The person who responds to treatment, meaning they're the person who accepts your answer that person is a type of person they must be seeking guidance how do you know if they're the ones that you should take spend your time to answer number one they must be seeking guidance they want to know the right path they're sincere they have intellect and they're understanding they they get it They are not overcome by envy or anger or love of desires or glory or wealth, but they are seeking the straight path. So how do you know this? Like someone comes up to you. and, you know, love of desires, for example, someone comes up to you, Sheikh, is it, you know, is it, can I get married, you know, without my parents and the two witnesses are like two people on a grocery counter, and I just said like, you know, it's like, well, you wanna answer that question, you know, that person has some agenda there, so you have to kind of take it back, you know. So, you know, somebody's aunt's asking something in order to get something. you know from you and this happens all the time as well this is something that our Ustad as well warned us about in Ifta my Ustad warned us about this that he said that people are gonna come to you and they want they know what they want to hear from you so they're gonna line up the question in such a way that you have that you give the fatwa in their favor already they're gonna start doing this they're not asking you sometimes Sheikh, what's the thing? They're coming to the mufti and they're saying, if this person said this, then I said this, and you know they should do this. So what's the answer? And the answer points back to them being right, that person being wrong. That's how, if it's a case, a court case, for example. So that person has a love of desire or glory or wealth. A person, a businessman is trying to find out how they can avoid paying zakat. And can I give away my money in this way and convert it to this and convert it to that and avoid paying a zakat? And then you're actually just giving them a legal stratagem or a trick. So this type of person, that's not the type of person you wanna be answering that question for. Like here, let me find a trick for you to secretly marry this person or get out of zakat in this or eat something haram, do something haram, no, that's not the type of person, then Imam Alzali continues. So that person has to be free of those things. And neither are they asking for jah. Jah is glory. They must be understanding. They're not overcome by envy, anger, love, desires, glory, or wealth. Glory meaning they're just asking to seem popular or to take your answer and say, look, I got this answer from so and so. So Imam Al Ghazali is saying that's not the type of person. Rather, rather, rather they should be seeking a straight path right they're sincere and their questions and objections are not from envy obstinacy or testing you what does that mean first of all it says something interesting their question and their objections what does that mean you can bring an objection to a scholar so you may have a question And they may answer you. And it's not wrong if you're sincere and you say, but I don't understand this. But what about this? But what about that? So as long as it's in a polite way, it's not in a rude way or in a way that's putting down, it's bad adab or it's out of bad ill will, then even to have like an objection to something, you know, people came to the prophet and objected about things, women came to him. Ya Rasulullah, the men go out and they do this, this, this, they get this reward, what do we get? The poor came to the Prophet and the poor migrants said, The people who have money, ya Rasulullah have run away with all the good deeds, they give sadaqah, we don't have anything. So you can come with questions and even an objection that is sincere. However, not from obstinacy, not from just trying to one-up and argue. So you see this as well, someone asks you a question, you answer the question, and they go, Well, what about this? And you go, well, what about this? And they've just got a bunch of copy pastes from some polemical website. They're just giving you the next one, the next one, the next one. Okay, as Mahiustad once said, they're quoting from books. Do they even know what the color of the cover of those books look like? No. So this is obstinacy or testing you, testing you. And this is not something you ask questions to do, someone's just saying, excuse me, yeah, this is like a test question. They just want to know, they just want to expose something about you to get other people angry or to embarrass you. This is testing or they're just testing to see, are you really smart? So what does this, this, this, this mean? And if you say, I don't know, then ha, see, you don't know. That's what they're doing. So that's not the type of person you should be answering. So he's clearing out everything from the slate and then he's saying, This is the type of person. that will take a treatment who doesn't have any of those other uh hidden agendas for you then it is permissible for you to busy yourself in responding to this person's question rather it is upon you to answer this person it is obligatory on you to answer this person right and This is what we'll end with, but he says something, this is very interesting. So out of the four different types of people who have the disease of ignorance, four different types of questioners, three of those questioners are not even worthy of giving an answer to. The person who has envy or hate for you. And they're just asking because of that. The person who's foolish and cannot understand, and the other one who will misinterpret what you say no matter what you say, right? Or who's testing you, or there's a number of things. Then the one person who will is the one who's sincerely seeking the answer, they can handle the question and they're asking to benefit themselves for the sake of Allah . And this is why Imam Ghazali, he goes, it's permissible to answer, no, it's obligatory. And this is why as well, Do you see how important it is to have a service where you can answer people's questions? You know, I'll tell you something. I learned something a long time ago. I learned this from Shaykh Faraz. We all preserve him. You know, when we were doing, when I was a student, what is it called, TA. He was training us in how to answer some of the questions, alhamdulillah, may Allah bless him. And you know, you take too long to answer something, you just take it for a long time. And he actually said, this is criminal negligence. And he said, why? Because someone in their dean doesn't know something and they need help. And they're waiting on you to answer a question and you're not answering. It's obligatory for you. If you put yourself in that position and you can answer the question, you should get them the answer or excuse yourself and say, I'm sorry, I can't do it. But I learned a lesson that day. This is many years ago, maybe like 10 years ago, eight, 10 years ago. And this is why it's something that's so important that when someone asks you a question, they don't know, their deen. It's different if they're asking a question that's like a detail that, look, this is not the priority right now. Someone comes to you with a serious question, they have a doubt. This is not the time to tell the person, don't worry about it, have an ice cream, it'll be okay, I'll tell you tomorrow or something like that. No, you try to answer the question. So they come, they ask you, my prayer, I don't know if it's valid or not, can you help me with this? You know, unless the person has some waswasa or something with a different story, but you know, you should try to answer their question. This is why it's so important as well to support. And this is just a tangent I'm taking, but this is why it's so important to support the idea of an answer service. Wherever you see that, whether it's a Dar al Ifta, Dar al Ifta, in some countries they have that, Seekers has an answer service as well. There are people out there who have freed themselves up to answer questions and organizations that have made it their job to try to cure people of this ignorance. And it's very important for all of us to support it in whichever way that we can. right? Whether it is through seeking answers and increasing an answer bank, or whether it is to refer other people to them, whether it's to financially support or whether it is to answer questions and help research or volunteer in any way. There's so many things you can do to volunteer and help scholars, whether in person or online in doing their research, right? It's even helpful. SubhanAllah scholars need to know if you're a specialist in your field, let's say you're a doctor, let's say you're a lawyer, let's say you're, a food specialist, whatever it is, chemical engineer, there could be questions, religious questions that come up that you have a technical understanding of that could benefit a scholar in their religious answer. And so you should also try to get in touch with scholars if you can and benefit them if you have a perspective on something and let them reach out to you or just say, look, if you have any questions on this, please let me know. I can help you answer that question. Whether it's like a fiqh ruling on divorce and you want to look at family law and you're a lawyer or a doctor who's talking about what's the ingredient in some type of medicine. So this is all, the society has to work together to answer questions that people have to cure people of ignorance. Inshallah, so we'll stop right there and we're taking a little bit less 'cause we're coming to the end of the term, so there are two more classes left. Inshallah. Are there any questions? In person or on the forum if there any questions we can take them up. Anybody say anything of note? Someone's asking, how do you control your repetitive stressful thoughts which lead to permanent depression which never goes away? How do you lead to stressful thoughts which leads to depression that doesn't go away? In reality, if it's something that is like debilitating or harmful to one, then they should seek professional help for that. There's nothing wrong with that. That's that's, again, one of the avenues that Allah has created for us to do that. So seeking that also just trying to from from the advice that I've heard from people who are very knowledgeable about these subjects is to, you know, just improve one's one's overall mental health and physical health, whether it's through things like a balanced diet, sleeping right, Socializing with other people getting off of excess time on the screen watching what they consume getting away from negative things on on viewing negative things getting exercise sunlight Vitamin D having a good diet sleeping proper times. These are all things that will help someone in in negative who have kind of negative thought processes However, I'm not a doctor and I don't claim to be one or a therapist. So These are things that you can do reading Quran Quran is a shifa for the hearts, doing salawat of the Prophet and trying to do zikr of Allah . This is the spiritual side of things that a person can consult someone and get something for them to kind of work on and feel good about through that side. However, if it's something that's kind of chronic or serious, and detrimental to one's daily life, then they should also go down a professional route just to make sure that they've cleared up everything. But there are other things that you can do for yourself before you go to that as well, inshaAllah. Any other questions? Yeah, . How does a scholar differentiate between a person who is ignorant or worth their time? That's a very good question. How does a scholar differentiate between a person who is ignorant and worth their time? So the scholar, remember we have to do, in general, there's a concept in our deen called . We have to think well, right, of other people. We have to think well of them. And anytime someone comes to you with a question, right, the suspicion should not be in the mind that, oh, this person is probably not sincere or like that. So this is why as well, for people who are answering questions or teachers or dais or scholars, a lot of their time gets spent just sorting out this type of thing where you're just listening to the question. Because in the past, most questions were either spoken but also written by letters. So they didn't have e-mail and instant messaging and stuff like that. So you'd get letters from other places and you would write answers and send them back. Or someone would come up to you in a masjid and ask a question. So this type of thing is that you have to wait until that person reveals a bit more about themselves. So you should never judge a person. And you have to be careful because sometimes a message may come in by an e-mail or something like that and you don't know the context to it. So you are not sure, is this person asking just to like, are they joking? Are they just like kind of just saying it to, and some people do ask questions just to joke around or are they really serious? So you have to look at the question. And does the question itself merit a response? You have to look at who's the person asking, if there's any way to find out about them, where are they coming from, what's going on. I mean, if a person is a very small child compared to if they're like a mature person, then the way that you answer will be different too. So you need to know hal mustafti, the condition of the person who is seeking the answer or the fatwa, that also makes a difference. And then the context, the siyaq also depends. So if you're in a situation where you're surrounded by, you go to pray in like another masjid, you're surrounded by a bunch of guys who are all laughing and looking down on you and someone tells you, throw the test question out at you. It happens sometimes, okay, and it used to happen back in the day. I don't think it happens anymore. But that could happen. So then you would know from the context that this is probably not the best thing to get involved with, but otherwise you're right. Sometimes you can't tell. And it takes time to know. Now, there are some very experienced scholars that I've seen, one of my Ustads, who could just see a question come in and after like 20, 30, 40, 50 years of answering people's questions, they could just get like a kind of Malaka, meaning like a kind of like a feeling in their heart. This person is trying to get this answer from you. right don't answer the question in this way or they'll say answer in a very diplomatic way and like this or they'll say something like be careful about this and that takes a lot of experience but you can't assume without knowing any other questions question how to advise someone who misses their salah due to over washing So that is a problem of misgivings or OCD perhaps, and that type of person should stick only to the sunnah, have somebody else watch them and limit how much they wash or go to the masjid and see what everybody else is doing, copy them and do no more, even if it feels like it's not done. And just stick with the sunnah and limit themselves. and then this was one way to overcome that but if it's a part of the problem is so great that they're not able to overcome it then they should seek professional counseling or help for OCD waswasa or similar but the way is to stick to the sunnah do not do anymore and know that this is about the mercy of Allah not about you doing things perfectly or correctly if you think that you know Imam Ahmed Zarooq said that the way to deal with waswasa is actually to stop caring about this idea that you're not gonna get it perfect because it's from shaitan. Once you've done the sunnah, that's the limit. So we don't wash more than, even three times, you don't have to keep vigorously rubbing, you wash, you rub the first time, then three times you wash and that's it. And the amount of water the Prophet used was like this much for wudu, something like, you know, and so once you know you're going beyond that or like too much beyond that then you should know that this is from the shaitan and you're following shaitan now or it's from pride you think that I know better and the sunnah is not enough or it could also be obstinacy where you think that I haven't done it I'm the one whose deeds my actions are going to make a difference on Allah accepting whereas Allah doesn't need you washing 10 times to accept your prayer and Allah told you there's a limit in order because Allah knows that and it's by Allah's mercy that our deeds are accepted not by necessarily the validity of our actions according to Ibn Jaim al-Hanafi any other questions but that type of question has to have some treatment involved usually there any questions okay Jazakkum Khairnu SallAllahu I said Muhammad Ali Wa Salaam Alaikum wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatu.
