Bismillahir Rahmanir Raheem, Alhamdulillahir Rabbil Alameen, Wassalatu wassalam ala Ashraf al-Abiyawal Mursaleen, Saidna Muhammadan Alaihi wa Sahbi Ajmain, Subhanakala Ailmala Ailam Alamtuna Inna Kantal Ali al-Hakim, Muhammad Alimna, Wanfa'ana Binatu Alimuna Wazidna Minfadlika Alimuna Ta'alima, Inna Kaala Kullu Shayin Qadira Sallallahu Allahu Saidna Muhammadan Alaihi wa Sahbi wassalam. Salamu Alaikum wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatu. Alhamdulillah, we are here for the 12th and final lesson of Imam Al-Ghazali's Ayuhal Walid, dear beloved son, dear son, oh child, dear beloved child, however you want to translate it, alhamdulillah. So we've come, you know, we've come a long way, alhamdulillah, through these, through this, you know, relatively short epistle. but one that is extremely, extremely rich with meaning and with spirituality. And so, Imam al-Ghazali, if you remember, he said that there are eight advices so your knowledge won't be against you. So he's ending his Risalah, his letter with eight advices. And he says that there are four things to refrain from, if you recall. Right? Four things to refrain from out of those eight, and the other thing are four things to do. So now, we are going to focus on the four things to do today. Right? Now, we'll talk about the first thing to do. We'll read it first in Arabic. And as for those four things which it behooves you to do, or which it is fitting for you to do, Al-awalu and taj'ala ma mu'amalatak ma Allahi ta'ala bihai thu la amalaka bihai abduk taradabiha minhu wala yadikul khatiru ka'alai wala taghdab he says and the first thing is that you make your dealings with Allah Most High such that if your if you had a servant and your servant were to deal with you in the same way that you would be pleased with it and pleased with with them and that you would not be annoyed by them or get angry so what's what is Imam Ghazali saying here the first thing you should do is that the way that you be with the way that you are with Allah right the way that you deal Muhammad is that dealings with Allah how do you deal with Allah not only outwardly but inwardly think about if you had a servant Okay, and that servant, how would you want that servant to behave with you? How would you want that servant to be with you? So you could say, I am pleased with my servant. And this servant does nothing to annoy me. I never get angry at this servant. How would that servant be? And then he continues, so he says, so what is the first thing he said? He said, Make your dealings with Allah Most High such that if your servant were to deal with you in the same way as you're dealing with Allah, you would be pleased with it and would not be pleased with him or her and would not be annoyed or angry, right? And so whatever ............. so whatever you would not accept for yourself if it was coming from your metaphorical servant do not accept that for Allah coming for yourself as he is your true master okay let's let's go back sometimes the words are quite terse so you have to think about this he's saying if there's something that you wouldn't want your servant to do then don't you do that to Allah you don't want your servant to disobey you if you have a servant I mean, SubhanAllah, many of us in many countries, especially the Western countries, we're not used to this idea of servant. In many countries, it's still this thing where you have like a servant and so on. The word they're using is slave. Obviously, slavery, alhamdulillah, is abolished. So we translate it as, instead of slave, we translate it as servant, which is more the more likely, more like you could say, the translation that we usually find more appealing to us. And he's saying that if it was that your servant, if they did something that you didn't like, so would you like your servant to disobey you? No. Would you like your servant to be rude to you? No. Would you like your servant to be late to serve you? Would you like your servant to slack off? Would you like your servant to take advantage of you? Would you like your servant to secretly dislike you? No, you wouldn't like any of those things. and you wouldn't like that while your servant in this world is a metaphorical servant it is Abdukal al-Majazi in reality the word is slave so it makes sense here there's no such thing in even there's no such human being can be a slave to another human being in a literal sense it is a metaphorical sense the one who is serving you even a servant is not your literal servant they're employed as a servant it's a metaphorical meaning why Because the real master is only Allah . And all of us are only actually servants and slaves to Allah . So he said, if you can accept this high standard of behavior from your metaphorical worldly servant, who is not even a servant in the real sense of the word, then why don't you bring that same standard upon yourself for the real master, Allah , whose real slave you are. And then he continues, he says, so that's the first thing that you have to do, right? And in this point, right, we often don't think about our servanthood to Allah . We think often about, okay, halal haram, can I do this, can I not do this? But do we ever think about the wider picture? Do we ever step back and say, What kind of servant am I to Allah? Oh Allah, what kind of Muslim am I to you? And step back and really evaluate our lives. And look, how often am I serving Allah ? How often am I remembering him? Oh Allah, how do I serve you? Like out of all the things I do every day, how many of those things are directly tied to service and love for you and worship for you? So all of these things matter, right? All of these things matter and they make a difference. and then he says the second thing was thani kulluma amil ta bin nas yeah kulluma amil ta bin nas ij al kama tarda ali nafsi ka minhum li annahu li annahu la yak mulu ima anu abdin hatta yohibuli sa'iri nasima yohabuli nafsihi okay so he's saying now the second thing right Yeah, so sorry, this seems to be a manuscript, maybe a manuscript discrepancy. So he's saying that every time you behave with people or interact with people, make your interaction the way that you would want You would want them to interact with you, right? Because your faith is not, the faith of a servant is not complete until he loves for all of people what he loves or she loves for themselves. So this is called the golden rule, right? In Western terminology, they call this the golden rule. Do unto others as you would have done unto you. Treat others the way you want to be treated, right? Reciprocity. this is what it means. It means do treat people the way you would want to treat them to treat you. Would you want people to cut you off in traffic? Would you want people to be rude to you? Would you want people to not make time for you? Would you want people to backbite about you? Then don't do that to other people. Would you want people to dry the toilet seat for you after you use it in the bathroom and flush the toilet and wipe down the counter after you make wudu. Would you like that? I think we'd all like that, right? So why don't you then do that for other people too? And you dry the toilet seat for them if you want that to be done for you. Wouldn't you like it if, you know, so in other words, it's always thinking about other people, but the way of judging is not what's good enough for them. You would say, what's good enough for me? Because often we say that is good enough for them, just give that to them and finish. And you kind of give people, you cheapen on how you treat other people. But then for yourself, you demand a high standard. You don't accept when people skimp on their responsibilities towards you. But when you're fulfilling someone else's responsibility, you get by and you just give the minimal bear thing, here, take it. Just get off my back. You're just getting obligations off your back. When you want things from people, When you go to your work, you wanna just scrape by with the least thing and get out. When people come to your house to do work, you're watching them. I'm paying you by the hour. You're watching their work, looking at this, critiquing everything. When you go to work, do you do it like that, right? So the second thing is in our slides is making all your dealings with people as you would like to be dealt with by them, right? Pretty simple, right? And a servant's faith is not perfected until they love for the rest of humanity what they love for themselves, right? And so this is actually taken from a, as we know, this might sound familiar, it's from the Hadith of the Prophet in Bukhari and Muslim, narrated by Sayyidina Anas ibn Malik that the Prophet said, none of you truly believes until you love for your brother or your sister, what you love for your own self. So what do you love for yourself? You like to be dealt with, with gentleness, with mercy, with respect. You wanna be treated with respect, right? You wanna be treated, you want other people to overlook your faults. When you do something wrong, you don't want people to pick up on you. You want people to behave with you humbly. You don't want to behave with an arrogant person. You want them to cover up your sins if they ever get to know about a sin. Do you cover their sins? You want them not to complain about you when something goes wrong. Do you complain about other people? You want them not to harm you in speech and in action. Do you harm them? Do you hit the people around you, beat them? Do you abuse them? Do you yell at them? And then do you like it if someone hits you and abuses you and yells at you? Maybe people do it because it was done to them before. This is why this is a very important thing. People often do what was done to them. Here, it's you should treat someone the way you want to be treated, not the way you were treated. That's what breaks the cycle, I'll do to you what was done to me. So if someone abused me in the past, I will abuse someone else, no. If you're mean to me, I'll be mean to you, no. I will think about how do I want you to interact with me, then I will do it that way, right? This is the way of the Muslims. And he's telling, remember, he's telling a senior scholar here, and this is the last four advices he has for him in the entire book, okay? And this is one of them, treat people the way you wanna be treated. What thalith? Either Quratal ilm? O Tala'atahu? O Tala'atahu? Yambagi an yakuna ilman yoslihu kalbakawa yuzaki nafsaka. Kamalaw alimta anna umraqa, umraqa, ma baktiya ghairu usbuin. Fabbid Doruri, lata shagalfi habi almulfiq. wal khilaf, wal usul, wal kalam, wamthaliha, li anna kata'alamu annahadhila uloom, la tughnika, bil tashaghiru bimuraqbatil kalb, bimuraqbatil kalb, wuma alifatisifatin nafs, wal ei arad, ana ala ik dunya, wat zaki nafsaka, anil anil akhlaq zamima, watashaghiru bimahabbatilahi ta'ala wa ibaadatihi, wal ittisafa bil ausafil hasana, wala yamuru ala abdin yamun walaylatun, so he says and the third matter that you must act upon he says whenever you pursue knowledge or you review knowledge meaning sacred knowledge right whenever you pursue or review knowledge then right it should be it is befitting that it should always be knowledge that repairs your heart fixes your heart And it purifies your soul. Always make sure it's that, right? So, let's see there. So basically why is that? Now this is very important, right? He's speaking to a scholar and Imam al-Ghazali is the Imam of Iraq, Imam al-Khurasan, someone who mastered the sciences of his time. And he went so far as to master the arguments of other sects of his time. Master them and teach it back to them and then refute them and show them the truth. SubhanAllah. Imam al Ghazali was so high in his knowledge, they called it Hujjat al Islam. He's the proof of Islam, meaning this one person's works and his efforts, right, could prove the truth of Islam in his time and place and for the needs. So it all comes back to this, that when you pick up knowledge now, after you have what you need of this knowledge, make sure it's always knowledge that benefits your heart. Don't pick up anything now. After you got what you need of your father, and we'll talk about that, then do not now make a rule for yourself. You're not gonna just read empty words, empty pieces of information. make it something that repairs your heart and purifies your soul and interestingly yes it is reading about akhlaq and spirituality and the hereafter but even knowledges which make you more obedient to Allah or teach you something new this can be done so this doesn't actually mean that you never ever read anything anymore but it's when you review that knowledge Right? Does it, is it something that you're calling your soul to and your heart to as well? So it's something to think about. He's not saying don't read fiqh again, don't read aqidah again, right? He's just saying from now on when you do it, you have to make it, you know, fix you inside, make you better, make you a better person. 'Cause one of the challenges that the students of knowledge have is that they could study for years and years and years and they're not changing as a person. And this is actually a pretty, this is one of the fitnas of knowledge, right? Because what happens is, imagine you're going, let's say you're an Islamic university or a madrasa, and you come in, you've just got so many faults, as we all do. And then you think of a fault, and it takes time to work on a flaw. But your classes are going every day. And then you're busy with your classes and you're trying to fix some things. And so being in the environment of knowledge has a way of, you know, fixing up some of the outward stuff. So you don't do the same things you used to outwardly because now you're in a group of people or you learn fix. So you start to act on it. But then interestingly, it's like because out of all the Olum, we treat the sciences of the heart, spirituality like a subject. And this is actually very problematic. Spirituality is not a subject. It's not like one of the uloom and there's many uloom and this is one of the uloom. If you make it like that, it's not gonna do what it's meant to do. It is supposed to be, this is a way of life, spirituality, and all the other subjects fall inside that. So you study fiqh with spirituality. You study kalam with spirituality. Meaning that you, what is the spirituality? It goes back to bring your heart closer to Allah and to remove those things which are blocking us from Allah And so this is why traditionally, right, you had your relationship with a spiritual guide, like in a guidance, or you would join the gatherings of dhikr, the ulama were also involved in those sciences. And so you would have the faqih who was an arif billah, you would have the hadith master who was a great spiritual master as well. You would have the faqih, the mutakallim who was also a great Sufi or you are you know for example, so you had this in the past And you know Ali is saying that don't just think that I because you get involved in knowledge You stop checking yourself because there's just too much to apply So he's saying now that you've reached that level you studied all this stuff Don't do that now now Tell yourself that I'm gonna make every single time I read something count for Allah's sake and then he says so just to just to continue the translation let's see he says where do we leave off yeah he says because if you knew that your lifespan had just one week left then out of necessity you would not be busying yourself with fiqh with the knowledge of fiqh and the knowledge of debates and polemics and the knowledge of of usul al fiqh principles of fiqh nor with theology Kalam and all these things you wouldn't be doing that if you knew that because you would know that all of these sciences are not actually going to benefit you in front of Allah they're not what's gonna they're not what's gonna save you and so but rather you would what would you be busy with you'd be busy with the watching over the heart right Murakabat al-kalb and Marifat Sifat and Nafs and you would be like what are the qualities of the nafs I need to know So then you get him out for my own nafs and you would turn away from all of the debates and the connections to do with dunya all the relevant issues all the modern issues you just you just turn away I don't have I can't deal with I don't want to deal with it and you would just purify your own nafs from your lower character traits you probably be a lot nicer probably ask people forgiveness you probably try to pay back your loans you know your debts and you would you would be busying yourself with the love of Allah and his worship And by trying to get qualities, by trying to adorn yourself with good qualities. And there is no single servant for whom a day or a night does not pass, except that they could die in it. So why is it that we don't realize that? And why are we delaying fixing ourselves? And why are we delaying correcting our bad qualities? and we're getting busy in all these knowledges and look I'm taking so many courses I'm going to this place and that place years pass by and we still have the same bad qualities I'm not talking about our limitations like your personality limitations like you know things that you can't help I'm talking about I'm not necessarily talking about that I'm talking about things like you know bad character traits that take us away from Allah that make us do wrong to other people that's what I'm talking about right So, you know, we often also think, oh, I wanna become more productive. I wanna cut down on coffee. Like, you know, we think about things like that. How often do we think about, I think I wanna speak to my wife a little bit better. I think I want to, you know, be a little bit kinder to my parents. I think I want to, you know, for example, things that are tough, things that actually take some effort to correct, right? And you see the results there because the results last. forever the results of that kind of effort lasts forever and also so our commentator is saying right he's saying neither would you be busy in learning fiqh and kalam and all these things but you would also not even be busy in teaching it or even reviewing it because he says our commentator says these knowledges are not the point this is what Imam Ghazali is saying they are not the point they are a means to reach actions and their means to learn actions and actions are the point and even the action itself is not the point it is the state of the heart of servitude with Allah right and so he's saying now however we should know something Imam Ghazali is not saying to everyone okay you know especially our listeners don't study fiqh don't study aqidah just go into tasawwaf no this is not what he's saying at all he's speaking to someone who has studied everything there is to study in all those fields. And he's saying, now you're just going more and more into it to go into the details. So he's saying you still need to have that necessary amount of knowledge in which you can operationalize your deen. So it's very important to understand this, right? This is a book, as we said before, like , those are books for the beginning. This is a book that we're getting to listen in on, but it's a book directed towards someone at the end of their studies of knowledge. they're kind of like at the end of their kind of like Sharia studies and they're in the beginning or like that somewhere in their spiritual journey right so we have to ask where each ourselves where we are but you still have to have that foundational amount of knowledge right because it's impossible at Imam Ghazali nobody can try to misquote Imam Ghazali by saying that he's saying you don't need you don't need knowledge oh why are you going studying these things This is not the right attitude either, right? So you can't quote Iman Ghazali and say, oh, you see, the Sufis were anti or like, you know, the spiritual masters, he left knowledge. No, one of the last books he wrote was in Usul al-Fiqh. So the idea that even what he's saying, it's funny because you might think that he just engaged in dhikr all the time for the rest of his life and it's not true. He was still into his scholarship, but he knew that for him at his level, yes, he was devoted to the hereafter and Allah , but he knew that it was a , it is a collective obligation for people who are able to fulfill the need of teaching knowledge that he kept on doing that or writing about knowledge and things like that. We're talking about the person now who is not going to do those things and they're simply studying more and more and more because it's become like a hobby for them. You know, they go around collecting fiqh books now and for them you know it's just another class to take to show that you're doing more and more and then you know because at the end of the day even in our in our madhab like they said that another that even looking into the books of our they used to say even just looking without even hearing a lesson is better than even standing up in the night in tahajjud so the had their point of view on this they were like no no no yes all the amal is okay right but for people to review knowledge to learn something new they thought this was superior to even worshiping in the night gaining knowledge even look and they also said things like learning fiqh is better than actually memorizing the rest of the Quran but again let's put it into context right and these also said This is why it's very important to understand. It's according to, have you fulfilled your own personal need? And are you a person who is tasked with fulfilling other people's needs in this? So that's the difference. If there was only one person who could teach fiqh in a community, and that person decided not to do it, to pray all night, that's a big disaster. Because yes, they would be devoted to Allah , They're having their thing, but they're leaving everyone else ignorant and suffering for that ignorance. So Imam Al-Ghazali, what he says has to be taken into balance, right? Imam Nawi says in Bustan Al-Alifeen, . He goes, what this means is that you should not limit yourself, like you should not limit yourself to only legal rulings, like in Yamdhurifu Il-Alm Zuhud, but also look into the knowledge of Zuhud, which is abstaining from the dunya. and wisdom, right? Because whoever does not look into these and the good qualities of the pious people, because whoever does not look into ilmazuhud, into abstaining from the dunya and into wisdom of the pious people, their heart gets hard and the hard heart gets distant from Allah. This is why he's saying this, that if you don't mix in your spirituality with the rest of your pursuits, your heart gets hard. And how many times have people complained about this in the past? And you know, that scholar who, the scholar who, a lot of knowledge, a lot of book knowledge, just hard-hearted, you know, not pleasant to be around. I don't mean that they're serious. I mean that, you know, it's just, you know, the idea of like personal responsibility in terms of your looking out for other people for mankind so he's saying don't become like this don't become like this and and there could be a difference of opinion madhabs so Imam Shafi's madhab could be that that after you fulfill your obligations in knowledge that worship and going towards Allah is more important and he says some of the Hanafis would say that after you have gained knowledge that teaching knowledge is better than busying yourself in acts of devotion although there are those who had different opinions right there are Hanafi's like they mentioned Dawud al-Ta'i who felt that after you've gained what you have of knowledge then you should devote yourself to acting on that knowledge and worship right so there are slight differences of opinion but we understand what the meaning is and then he says Then he says well He says and busy yourself with the love of Allah that our commentator says well He goes even though Love of Allah is something that is from Allah Love of Allah is not something that we get into our own hearts. It's a gift from Allah It's a gift from Allah. So what does it mean to busy yourself with love? He's saying It's a gift from Allah. At the same time, trying to acquire and obtain it has to happen from the side of the servant. So we try to strive and get it, but we are not the ones who take it from the tree and pluck it. We just are doing the action to create the necessary readiness or to show that to Allah, but it's Allah who creates that love inside our hearts, right? And how is that done? By stopping to see and to notice anything other than Allah . Allah eventually, what he's saying is, you know, may Allah make us realize these words in the easiest and best of ways. I mean, that one stops caring about other things. They care about Allah and they empty their hearts of every other desire that they have. except for Allah and so he's saying ... so when he thinks about Allah's name in his heart Allah when he thinks about that in his heart and that name of Allah gets firmly rooted inside his heart and he says then and it continues and continues inside the heart he says this is when the savor of being cut off from everything except Allah takes place right and this is when the heart does not attach itself to other things once that heart is attached to the sweetness of being in Allah's dhikr then it doesn't want to attach to anything else and then even when the heart tries to attach to something else it's not able to do it because its heart is attached to Allah and this he's saying our commentator is saying and this is the whole point of the spiritual path may Allah make us realize these lofty words you know, SubhanAllah. And then he says, Ayu halwalad. Now he brings his last, this is his last ayu halwalad, if I'm not mistaken, yes, no, second last. Then he says, Ayu halwalad, it's not minni kalaman akhar. He says, Listen, listen up, hear from me. another piece of advice, another lesson. And think about what I'm going to tell you until you find your salvation in it, in your deliverance. If you knew, if you were told that the king, the sultan, the ruler, your president, your prime minister, your ruler was about to visit you after a week in your house, Then you know very well that in that week you would not busy yourself except with neatening up and fixing up everything that you think the king's eyes would fall upon. If a king was to visit your house, your king, your ruler, you would fix every single thing about you that you think that the king would see. From your clothes, you fix up your clothes, your body, you make sure you get your haircut, get your, you know, whatever, you know, you'd make sure your house, you'd fix this up, I need to repair this, you know, sweep the yard, whatever it is, your couch, make sure there's a table there, you make sure that there's a good reception. Well, Antafakkar and now think about what I have what I'm indicating towards he goes because you you have good understanding you're a person of understanding and sometimes just a single statement is enough for an intelligent person understand what I'm telling you he goes if a king was about to come to your house in a week you fix every single thing that that king would see in relation to you so now under just understand what I'm trying to tell you that's all he's saying just understand what I'm saying we'll call Rasulullah because the messenger of Allah said in Allah and he's saying he's saying that the prophet is reported to have said verily Allah does not look at your outward forms nor at your acts but your but he looks rather at your hearts and your intentions. And actually, the way that I've seen this narrated is that, In Allaha Allah Yandhuru ila quloob ila suwarikum wa amwalikum, wala kin yandhuru ila amalikum wa quloobikum quloobikum wa amalikum that Allah does not look at your outward form and your wealth, but rather he looks at your acts and your hearts, right? And so he's saying even your actions Allah would not even look at the not only just the form your outward form like your body your looks Allah doesn't care if you're good looking or not Allah doesn't care how much money you have Allah doesn't care how nicely you dress. I mean, that's not what you're being judged on So the way that other people like you that's not how Allah likes you Allah looks at your heart Allah looks at what you've done Imam Ghazali our commentators going even deeper. He's saying Allah doesn't even care about the form of your deeds, even the form of your deeds. in other words, you could, you could, maybe you don't have the ability to pray. or to recite Quran in the best way maybe you're just not as eloquent maybe you don't have you don't have all the strength to do other things but it's not the outward form even of your actions that Allah is looking at let alone the outward form of your body but it's the inward aspect of even your actions which is found in the heart and he said And he says, and then he's telling a student, and if you wanted the knowledge of the states of the heart, then go read my Ikhya alumuddin. He's saying go look at that. I can't, he's not gonna tell all of the things in this short letter. And other things that I've written. And this knowledge, he's saying, that I've written about Ikhya alumuddin, the knowledge of the states of the heart, he says, that it is Farda'in. It is individually obligatory on every single individual. So according to Imam Ghazali, he felt that knowing the sins of the heart is Farda'in. Like the same way you learn Wudu and you learn fasting in Ramadan and you learn Zakat. He says in his opinion, learning the states of the heart was Farda'in. Because otherwise, the heart is where sins come from, and it is far for us to know how not to disobey Allah, and how to do what Allah wants. And you can only do that by learning what the states of the heart. Now, does this mean that you have to pick up ? No, he's not saying that. What he's saying is it's personally obligatory, meaning in whichever way you learn them. It could be that you learn them through your parents. It could be that you learned it from school. If you went to some sort of, you know, religious school, it could be that you're taking classes online, right? He's saying that somehow or another, you need to know these things. You need to know these things, the states of the heart. And you see, and all the other knowledges are , meaning going too deep. There's no such thing as going too deep into knowledge of the heart because you're fixing yourself for Allah. and you're taking out your sins he goes whereas other sins it is a other knowledges it is a it is a obligation of collective responsibility if one person becomes a faqih in your community and can answer the questions of people then it's not farth on everyone else to go and become a faqih unless there's a greater need but with fiqh there's a great deed so you need more people to do that but like for example like a master logician you know you know do you have to master logic do you have to everyone have to master um nahu grammar not everyone has to master grammar but someone does have to master grammar in order to understand Quran right someone does have to master logic in order to understand the arguments of those who are who are debating the Muslims right and this way even medicine and even engineering and even counseling all those things could be obligatory communal obligations if one person or enough people do them The sin of not doing it is lifted from the rest of the community. And then he says, He goes, all those other sciences are communal obligations, except that which you need to fulfill those things which Allah made for you. So you have to learn how to pray. It's far. You have to, why? Because prayer is far. You have to learn how to fast. So everyone they say should, because we are not living in a time and a place where you either communities teach people the Fard or you learn about it from home sometimes then if someone has not had that exposure then they should try to fulfill that Fard through whatever means they can for example through taking a course you know this is why we have these courses absolute essentials of Islam for example you know if you take that course you pretty much have your basics whether in whichever madhab you choose right so that's an example of what Imam al-Ghazali is saying and then he says Yuafiqaq Allah huta'ala hatta to Hasilahu May Allah give you success so that you acquire that knowledge of the state of the heart. Then he says, War Rabiya Now, what is the fourth thing to do? The fourth thing to do, Alla tajma mina dunya Now, this is the last advice he's giving, okay? This is the last one. Alla tajma mina dunya akhtharab min ki faihee sanatin Interesting. He ends with this. He said, do not stock up more than a single year's worth of worldly needs. Okay, of your food and things like that. Kamakana rasulullahi sallallahu alaihi wasallam yu'iduli baadi hujuratihi just as the messenger of Allah, peace and blessings be upon him would do for some of his wives. So the Prophet , he used to, he used to Save up grain because you see grains and dates So in those times you have a harvest like it's not like food was available all the time There's a harvest season and other times you'd have to save food and preserve it So he's saying hamdulillah he's saying that That just like the prophet used to do that with and he would give his wives one year's worth of Grains you can save up for a year So it's actually quite a bit. Most people don't have money for a year in advance, Maswillah. But also, it's because of the availability of that type of thing as well in their time and place. So I'm just stretching a little bit. And he says, yeah, and he says, because ... He says, interesting, he says, and the Prophet had multiple wives, as we know, and he says, the Prophet however, would not save a year's worth of food for every one of his wives. Only the ones of his wives that he knew, she had a little bit of, I don't want to say that, it's Imam Ghazali's words, he says, had a little bit of tenderness in her heart, weakness, tenderness towards wanting that. And as for those of his wives who had full yaqeen, right, such as Aisha , then he would not save any grain for her, any food stuff, except for a day or even half a day. SubhanAllah. You know why? This is the sensitivity of the Prophet . He knew, he knew which of his wives, like some for example, and this is very important, right, some spouses They need to have a little savings. They need to show them that the shelves are stocked, the fridge has food in it, don't worry. And this is amazing because it's the Prophet's sensitivity towards another person's mentality and needs. So for some women, or men too, if they don't feel that they have enough in their savings and that they've got a fridge of food, they start worrying, they start busying their mind away from things. And so the prophet would say, Look, you have what you need, don't worry. Just worship Allah. Let's serve the deen. I'll take care of the, don't worry about the duni. Because it's true, and sometimes you think, Where are we gonna get our groceries for next month? He's saying, No, you have it. But those wives of his who are on a different level of reliance on Allah , he would not save a year of grain for them, he would only save a day Imagine just buying groceries for that day or next day, sometimes even half the day. So it's like, what do we got to eat? We have breakfast. Do we have dinner? Nope. We don't have dinner. Wake up the next morning, then why? Because they have yaqeen, and reliance on Allah that Allah will send food for them. So in the same household, he operated differently with different wives. And this is very interesting as well because, and he used to say, and he used to say, Why? Because the Prophet used to say, Allahumma ja al-quta ali Muhammadan kifafin. He would say, O Allah, make the sustenance of the family of Muhammad just enough. He actually used to make dua for that. Because he himself did not want to save back any, and he did not store food for himself. For his own preference, he would live day by day reliant on Allah save for a little bit for his wives who wanted it he would give them and for those wives who were on his way he would say all right come with me now we'll do it day by day so look at that as a final lesson Imam Ghazali is actually saying something it's interesting because out of the four things to do it's interesting because he uses the word do not stock up so it sounds like a do not do but if you want to summarize it what it means is stock up only what you need for the year and then leave the excess after that. So whatever you think is more than one year, it doesn't mean you can't save up. And a lot of students of knowledge and religious people, they think this. They think that they feel bad. Oh, I'm saving money, I shouldn't do that. Or some people, unfortunately, when they get religious, they force other people now to live on the bare minimum, just like how they used to live, or someone, a bachelor, Used to live alone, very, very threadbare life, like the Sahaba. When he gets married, he still wants his wife to live like that. I slept in rough, you sleep completely rough too. I didn't have to heat up my water before making wudu, you don't heat up your water too. I just used to have, I don't know, bread without putting anything on it, you just have plain bread too. No. So Imam al-Ghazali is saying you can secure your comforts a little bit. And for the student of knowledge, it's very important to know where is their family in that journey. Sometimes your spouse may be gung ho 100%. Sometimes they'll tell you, If you go to another country, I will follow you to that country, I'll support you. If you go live under a rock, I will go live under a rock with you. Just, I wanna be with you to serve Allah. And that's great if you have a spouse like that. other people other spouses will say no I don't want to get into that you want to be a student of knowledge fine just give me my you know give me my needs and you should also provide for that in within within the reasonable amount that you can do right so this is this is a the last advice that Imam Al Ghazali gives and then he says subhanAllah let's just ask let me just let's just stop here for a second Because the last thing that he mentions is he finishes with a dua. Because if you remember in the beginning, his student asked him for a dua. Let's see what, if you go back, right, what did the student actually ask him? He says, let's read back to the original question that the student said. He said, the student said, now listen, we've heard all these advices. I have studied the students that I have studied a wide variety of disciplines and have spent the prime of my life learning and amassing them. The time has come for me to learn which variety of knowledge will benefit me in the future and offer me solace in my grave and which will not benefit me unless I abandon it. For the Messenger of Allah said, Oh Allah, I seek refuge in you from knowledge which does not benefit. And this is where he asked Imam Ghazali. He said, My aim is that the Sheikh address my need by writing a note, a letter that should remain with me for the span of my life and that I could act upon through my lifetime, Allah permitting, InshaAllah. And he also had asked some other questions about spirituality. If you remember that Imam Ghazali says, I can't write about this to you. You have to practice the spirituality with Allah, it'll answer itself. And then he said, You asked me for a dua, and he closes with a dua. But let's just summarize for now. And if anyone has any questions, as this is the final lesson for the course, you can put them up on the chat box. But let's just review those four things to do. What is it? Be to Allah the way that you would want a servant to be with you. Treat others the way you want to treat others. So treat others the way you want them to treat you. Number three, make the knowledge that you pursue knowledge of the heart. And number four, only stock up for one year's needs. So if you go back now, take a step back to the summary of eight advices. This is the last thing that Iman Ghazali says. What are the summary of those eight advices? The four do not dos and the four dos. Number one, do not debate, meaning avoid arguing and confrontation. Number two, do not be a preacher. In other words, avoiding ostentation and hypocrisy. So if you cannot memorize all the advices, just memorize the notes that we're going through here. If we can get back to the slide. So number three, do not mingle with rulers. In other words, don't worry about status and don't compromise your religion. Number four, do not accept the gifts of rulers. In other words, watch out for greed and dependency on other people for your risk. So those are the do not dos and those are the basic things the student of knowledge should know. And then he says, and watch out for your dealings with Allah, so think about your servanthood to Allah. Dealings with fellow people, so treat people with equality and respect. Prioritize spirituality and character in your knowledge, and stock up in the world but not too much. So have a balance of things. Those are the recap of the eight advices. Let's take an even bigger step back and do a recap of Ayuhul Walad in like 10, 12 points. Why are we doing this? Because we've gone through this letter over 12 weeks, three months. In reality, you could read this letter in the matter of an hour, right? Less than that. But it behooves us now that we went back to the original question, because oftentimes when we study a text, we forget the point of why we started it. Does that happen? Like you finish the end and you forget how you started. It started with a question. Which knowledge is going to benefit me in the hereafter? Which should I not? should not bother with so are you halwalad if you go back to this entire letter it's in a few points number one prophetic hadiths have enough to advice to suffice us just look at the sunnah of the prophet and you'll get an answer to most things number two knowledge alone will not save us if you remember like lesson number one lesson number two you know as I saying knowledge alone will not save you actions are more are most important number three Spiritual realization and not formalistic information is the point of Ilm and Amal. So realization is the point. Number four, the summary of knowledge is to know what obedience and worship really are. So all of these things we're learning, this class and every other class and seekers and all the books we're going to read, the whole point is to know what obedience and worship to Allah really is. Number five, some knowledge is experiential. This is where Imam Ghazali, if you remember around the middle of our course, he took a turn from talking about action to now saying experiential knowledge of the heart cannot always be explained through words. You have to try it. Then he talked about the four essentials for the seeker. Then he spoke about the eight wisdoms. Then he spoke about the true spiritual guide. Then he spoke about adab with the spiritual guide and what every aspirant needs. And then he talks about characteristics of tasawwuf, of spirituality, slavehood, tawakkul, reliance on Allah, and sincerity, ikhlas. And finally, this is when he ends with eight advices, so that your knowledge will not be against you on the day of judgment, but it will be for you. And this is the entire summary of Ayuhulwalad. and then he is going to talk and make a closing dua before we read that dua and make that our dua as well for the course we'll take up any questions inshallah because we didn't have as long of a class today. are there any questions? nope okay not yet okay if there are any questions at the end of the dua you can still ask them as well so he says to close Okay, fine, yes, is there a question? Isn't it basically the prophetic way of living spiritually and physically and mentally? Yes, yes, exactly. The summary of Ayyuhulwalad is the truly prophetic way of living physically, spiritually, mentally. Very good. MashaAllah. Okay, we'll take other questions then at the end. So he says, . He says, . Now he ends this by saying, Oh, my dear child, son, daughter, . I have now written and addressed your requests in this letter, in this thing that I've written to you. Then it behooves you now to act on what I've said. Right? And do not forget me by not mentioning me in your pious prayers. Right? So don't forget me in your righteous prayers. That's also part of acting upon what I have taught you. Why? Because you should always give thanks to the person who does something good for you. So you say, if I've benefited you in this book, if I have benefited you, then also make a dua for me. That's how you can thank me, make a dua for me. So look at Imam Ghazali, the Imam. Who do you think that person was? Who Imam Ghazali asked for their dua? Allahu Akbar. And he says, and as for the dua which you asked me about, Then go look for it in the Sahih transmitted Hadith duas. You asked me for a dua, go look for it in the Hadith books. That's what he says. And then he also adds, . And also you can read this dua. in all of your times, especially after each prayer. So now the interesting thing is, so first he said, you ask me for a dua, go to the dua of the Prophet . Go to the prayers of the Prophet . Don't ask me for a dua. That's humility. And then he goes and gives him a dua that either he compiled from different sources. We're not sure. It's not narrated that we know in a hadith. but it could be taken from different hadiths or this is a dua and this is okay because the salahin and the ulama they used to actually write duas you know and which were reflective of their spiritual states and recite them as urad and hisbs. So he says so now he says say this dua Whenever you get a chance, and make sure you do it after your prayer especially. He says, Allahumma. And now we also make dua. Bismillahirrahmanirrahim. Alhamdulillahirrahim. Sallallahu alayhi wa alayhi wa sahbi yajma'im. Allahumma ya wa jibalbujud. Ya wa hibal khair waljud. O Allah, O one who is necessarily existent. Oh one who gives all good and generosity. Pour down on us the lights of your mercy. And make it easy for us to arrive at the perfection of knowing you experientially, Allah. Glory be to you beyond any deficiency. We have no knowledge except that knowledge which you have taught us. and we have no experiential knowledge of you or familiarity with you except how you have inspired us oh Allah you are the most all-knowing and the all-wise oh Allah we ask you from your blessings and your bounties it's complete complete perfection in that your complete bounty and for protection from sins and protection, your protection to be constant around us. And from your mercy, we ask for it to be comprehensive over us. And from well-being, good health and well-being, we ask that we attain it. And we ask you for the best of this life. And we ask you from our lifespans to have, to give us what is the happiest, what is the most felicitous, O Allah, in your eyes. And we ask . And we ask, O Allah, that we are given excellence in a way that is most perfect and complete. And we ask for your gifts. O Allah and your generosity and gifts and bounties that which is the most general and the most widespread and we ask and out of your bounties and your largess that which is the most quenching of our thirsts and the sweetest and from your gentle loving kindness that which will benefit us most and of your forgiveness ya Allah and of your pardon we ask for that which is the most combining of all into combines all of our sins to forgive it ya Allah Allah be for us and do not be do not be against us ya Allah Allah bring to an end our lifespans with felicity and happiness with you and make our hopes all of our hopes realized with even more than we could we could hope for and join and connect our mornings and evenings with well-being ya Allah in this life and the next and make our traveling and our destination to your mercy. Allahumma usboob sijala afrika aladhunubina O Allah, pour buckets of your mercy upon our sins. wa munna alaynab israhi oyubina And Allah, do us those favors, show us your favor by fixing up our deficiencies. and our flaws and make consciousness and fear of you our provision in this life and hereafter and make our struggling and our striving to be in the path of your deen for the sake of your deen and make our reliance be solely upon you and our dependence And make, O Allah, our eventual settling and our destination to your supreme good pleasure. O Allah, make us firm on the path of being straight on the straight way. And make us enter in to that abode of everlasting, of everlasting settledness. And give us shelter. We seek your refuge. Give us refuge. from those things in the dunya which will cause us to regret on the day of judgment and make easy for us upon us the burdens and the heaviness of the heaviness of burdens and give us rizq o Allah provide us with the life of those who do many different types of good deeds. And suffice us in protecting and turn away from us the evil of the evil people, ya Allah. And the scheming and plotting of those people who are sinners and profligates. And free our necks and the necks of our fathers. And our mothers and our brothers from the Hellfire. By your mercy, O almighty, O all forgiving, O generous one, O cover concealer of sins and flaws, O clement one, O forbearing one, O all powering one, overpowering one. Ya Allah, ya Allah. Ya Allah, O Allah, through your mercy, O most merciful of those who show mercy. O Allah, please forgive us. Ya Allah, please forgive us. Bismillah rahman rahim, alhamdulillahi rabban saladana saiddam Muhammad alaihi wassahbidran. Thank you so much for letting us finish this book, Ya Allah. Thank you so much for letting us read the words of your servant Imam Al Ghazali so many years later, a thousand years later ya Allah and that caused us to benefit from it ya Allah. Ya Allah let us take what we've learned here and practice upon it make us make it change our lives make it make it bring good into the lives of ourselves and our families and our communities and everyone else anyone who has heard any of these lessons or served this book or translated it or done anything to serve it or supported those who served it and our families and anyone connected to us ya Allah make it a means of guidance make it a means of felicity ya Allah to reach you and your good pleasure ya Allah ya Allah forgive us ya Allah for the mistakes that we've had ya Allah for all of our flaws ya Allah we're learning about such lofty things ya Allah and we haven't even done the basics Ya Allah, make us do all the basics, Ya Allah, that you want us to do. And then make us learn exactly what Imam Ghazal is talking about and more, Ya Allah, with you. Because we know that for you, Ya Allah, nothing is impossible. Ya Allah, we completely declare ourselves completely useless and completely incapable, Ya Allah. Ya Allah, we are not even students of knowledge, Ya Allah. Ya Allah, it is a joke, a disrespect. to say that we are students of knowledge even ya Allah we are just benefiting from your pious and righteous ulama that you put in this earth for us to benefit from ya Allah ya Allah so far removed from the things which which bring your mercy so far removed from the behavior of someone who tries to say that they are studying your knowledge should should have with qualities that embarrass us ya Allah forgive us for our hypocrisy forgive us for forgive me ya Allah from my hypocrisy in the things that I've read in this book that I don't measure up to and for all the times that we read these things and we just let it go over our heads may Allah send infinite peace and blessings on your prophet and his companions and all the prophets send peace on them as well and their families and their people may Allah and be pleased and raise the rank of Imam al-Ghazali infinitely and those who have commentated on his book those who have translated his book. Ya Allah raised the rank of our Imam and let us benefit through all his works Ya Allah different works and let us act upon the things that he has said that will bring us close to you and away from your punishment and away from your sins. Ya Allah make this a means not only of Ya Allah our salvation in the next life also Ya Allah ease in this life well-being in this life make it a Shifa for all those Ya Allah who are suffering in any way and who have any trouble or problems And make us, ya Allah, serve your deen more firmly and with more tawfiq and ijtihad, ya Allah, and ease and baraka and tawfiq, ya Allah, through the baraka of this book and the baraka of the Imam who wrote this book, ya Allah, and the baraka of the path of your Prophet and the love of your Prophet, ya Allah, that you and this deen that you have blessed us with, O merciful, O most merciful those who show mercy, ya Allah. Forgive us for our sins, ya Allah, and make us thankful to you and grateful to you always. And bless all the Muslim means... Bless all of our and our parents and our children and our families and all those who, ya Allah, are suffering, make it easy for them. All the Muslim means... I want to thank everybody for for this is my first term as well here at seekers and it was very nice alhamdulillah to have read this book as the first thing you know while I'm here it was a big blessing so forgive me as well for any for all my mistakes that I might have made in conveying this this book it's a big responsibility but I just did what I was asked to do inshallah are there any other questions Someone was asking, can you please explain a bit about not arguing and confrontation? Yeah, so not arguing, confrontation basically means that we don't get into debates needlessly. He said, don't be a debater if you can as much as possible. The place where this comes up are not only like debating with your parents, arguing with your parents, arguing with your siblings, arguing with your spouse, but it's also religious, what he was talking about was religious debate. Because what that does is it sucks the whole spirituality out of what you're talking about. So like, you know, going on Facebook and in the comments section, you're going back and forth, you know, trying to refute people in the masjid, there's people of a different understanding, a different sect. Arguing means taking debate and making it into an argument. That's what it means. Avoid that at all costs. He was saying, and if you listen to the last lesson, he, you know, was it the last lesson? Yeah, it was the last lesson and the one before that perhaps as well. He mentioned, we go more into what he meant by do not be a debater and do not argue. He meant any debate, unless it is absolutely a duty for you to get into debate. He felt this scholar should not be debating. And he was a master debater himself, but he knew that he was the only one who could do that at the time and also keep his intentions straight. Because when you debate and you argue, you want to win, right? When someone tells you this, you say, no, this, no, but, but, but back and forth. So you want to win. So it's something that connects to you enough. So we try to get away from that. This follow up. What if we intend good and if someone is doing something un-Islamic? Yeah, but many times arguing doesn't actually solve that. Argument makes the other person more stubborn or you'll notice, you rarely win an argument and convince another person. The person has to be very, very have a very good quality of justice and fairness to listen through an argument. Most people, you tell them and then you, you know, it depends what you mean by argument as well. If you're yelling and throwing things around, that's a different story than if you're reasoning with somebody calmly. But Imam Al Ghazali talks about this. If you review the last lesson or two, you know, you'll see a few of the details that Imam Al Ghazali speaks about. Sha Allah. It's a good question though. Thank you so much, inshaAllah, and please continue to ask questions on the forum or you can send questions in. JazakAllah Khairan, Salaam Alaikum, Wa Rahmatullahi Wakatuh. Take care. Wassalallahu Alaihi Wasallam.
