Bismillah Rahman Rahim, Alhamdulilahir Abdul Alameen, SallAllahu Alayhi Muhammad Wa Ali Wa Sahbi Jain, Subhanakala Ailma Alamtana Indkantal Aleemul Hakeem Allahumma, Alimna Main Fauna, Wan Fauna Bimaatu Ali Muna Wa Zidna Min Fadika'ima Inna Ka'ala Kulushain Qadir, SallAllahu Alayhi Wa Sahbi Salam Asalamu Alaikum wa Rahmatullahi wa Barakatu Alhamdulillah. We are here for the 11th lesson, right? The penultimate, second to last lesson, alhamdulillah, of Imam al-Ghazali's Ayuhul Walad, dear beloved son or dear child, advice for living right. Imam al-Ghazali is speaking, if you remember, he spoke about eight advices. He's closing his letter with eight advices. to his student so your knowledge will not be against you and he says there are four things to refrain from and four things to do in these advices so that makes eight right four plus four and if you remember he said the first thing to desist from what was the first thing if you remember the first thing you should not do number one is do not debate anyone on any matter as much as you're able to and last week we looked at the the details of what that means to debate someone and what it means when it's permissible to debate someone and when Imam al-Ghazali is saying do not do it and the vast majority of situations to debate someone. Why? Because when you debate someone, as we said last week, the purpose of debate, true debate, is to reach the truth. But when it just becomes an argument, about showing who's right, that's from the nafs. So when something comes from the nafs, then it's not for Allah anymore. Now you're not trying to argue. And it doesn't have to be between scholar and scholar. It could be between brother and sister, husband and wife. It could be between friends. It could even be between the person that you drive past somebody in the supermarket and you just take their parking spot or something like that. and you're trying to exchange views but it becomes emotional and the point becomes that it doesn't matter I want to say I'm right and I want to I want you to stop talking or to admit defeat. This is why that is one of the biggest problems with debate that's one of the biggest harms and the risks of debate that you'll start debating for your nafs, your ego and so that's why Imam al Ghazali is saying as far as you can as much as you're as far as you're able to don't get into debate people don't come to the truth through debate have you ever seen anyone just look at an argument how many times have you seen someone in an argument argue with each other and then after a heated exchange one of them saying you know what all right you're right no problem and just completely surrender to the other person doesn't happen it only happens if one person is totally subservient to the other They say, okay, you know, and they're not debating. But once that debate starts, once that argument starts, look at the conclusion of all the debates. You know, unless you have like a debate at like Oxford Union or something where the house gets to vote or something, even that doesn't change people's views usually. They come, people come to support the side that they're cheering for, you know. So anyhow, we talked about that last week. And we won't go over all of the details of that. And Imam al-Ghazali says, the second thing to desist from. So let's actually read from Imam al-Ghazali himself. He says, and the second thing that you should leave. and we'll talk about so the second thing that you should desist from he says is beware and avoid at all he's like basically saying be cautious and avoid at all costs basically that you become a preacher or a a reminder like meaning like a person who gives a talk giver so beware of being a preacher or admonisher okay unless like in other words so what is he saying what are we in a preacher right um a wife was a person who would like sit in a masjid uh or sit in a public place or go to people's homes or go to a place. And he's a religious person who would give ringing speeches and gather large crowds and basically is a speaker. It's what we would call in our terms a speaker, right? Someone who gives And I'm just going like this because, I mean, obviously everyone's a speaker who's speaking, right? But there are differences. So it's someone who, um, gives talks, like talks or what they call Bayan or what they call, uh, uh, you know, uh, even a hottera, like a thought, um, reminders. Um, so this is called preaching. Preaching means to promote something through speech, to call people towards some sort of religious, thing. So you would think like, isn't being a preacher a good thing? Like, is that a, you know, it's commonly, preaching is commonly associated with, you know, kind of like missionary evangelical style, you know, if you want to see in popular Western culture, what the preacher is. Someone who gets up in front of people and gives them a ring, a ringing speech. And that ringing speech, you know, a preacher can fill an entire stadium. A preacher can fill an entire stadium. And people become, you know, like they almost like fawn over them, you know, they become like fans of a speaker. And then they follow the speaker around. And so the speaker uses a lot of emotive speech and uses a lot of expressions, stories to keep the audience interacting with him or her and keeps the people kind of at the edge of their seats. And the point is to give them religious reminders, but by, uh, by emotionally swaying them and by making them feel, uh, you know, that they're in part of a narrative to bring out some type of response from them. Now, there's nothing now in it, in and of itself, I'm not saying this is not a wrong thing. Subhanallah, I mean, we hear speakers, you might call them dais today, duat, they're giving dawa. you know, influencers, reminders, so even influencers on like, on major platforms. So Imam Ghazali is saying, it's interesting 'cause we would say that that's a very good thing, you know, to be a speaker about Islam, you're giving dawah to Islam. So most people, especially commonly among the Muslim community, they would say that's a really good thing, especially because those are the people who remind other people about the deen, You go listen to talks and lectures, when you go to conferences, much of that is preaching. However, Imam Ghazali was telling his student, try not to become one of them, try not to. And it's interesting because usually the first thing, when a student of knowledge becomes a student of knowledge, so many of them, they didn't actually understand what seeking knowledge meant and what being a scholar meant. So you often first get inspired towards being a scholar by a speaker who happens to be a scholar themselves, right? But their main job now is to go around and give talks, not teaching necessarily, but talks. And there's a difference, like I said, between a preacher and a teacher. In this, a scholar and a preacher are kind of two different functions in Imam al-Ghazali's understanding of how he's speaking about it. A preacher can be a scholar, but may not be, may just be like an educated lay person who can speak very well, you know, and a speaker, a teacher or a scholar may be a preacher, but the vast majority of scholars are not preachers. It's just the ones that you see. So if you ask yourself, like, who are the ulema, who are the scholars that you know? If you ask a random person, chances are they will list popular speakers on the internet, whether they aren't scholars or not. Many times as well. But however, we know, I mean, people who, you know, know who the scholars are, they'll be like, you know, oh, a speaker. If you say that's scholar, they might even be like, oh, scholar. Okay, yeah, that is okay, fine. Yeah, technically scholar, but they would consider the scholars people who are kind of like locked in libraries and and in different functions that deal with that. There's nothing to say that one is good or one is bad, we're not saying that. Or one is better, one is worse, or you should look down, not at all. What those people are doing is a very, very important function, even through social media, even through YouTube talks, speaker circuits, whatever, there's a very important thing. But what Imam Ghazali is saying is, he's saying you really have to be careful of that, you really have to be careful of that. Why? Because many times as well, when a person starts out wanting to study knowledge, they hear the speakers and the preachers and they feel that that's what knowledge is. That I'm gonna become, I want to become like that. So then they wanna study for some time and the Nafs very quickly wants to get on the mic. And that is poison for the soul. That is absolutely poison. I'm not saying this for other people, I'm saying for me, for me. I remember when I wanted to go out and study, I wanted to be like the popular speakers I heard speaking in the conferences. There was no YouTube back then. And we were moved and you'd cry in their sessions and stuff like that. But then you thought, you began to think that you're supposed to study in order to speak to people. So then what happens is then as a student, you get into university and you're an MSA and because you're religiously interested, they give the guy who has a bit of a beard or reads a bunch of English translation books and say, hey, why don't you give the khutbah? And so immediately that love for speaking and preaching comes out. And you say, yeah, okay, in front of people. And then you begin to learn things, you begin to learn things, hey, I can use this. Think about that. You get a line, I can use that in my next talk. Not I can apply this for myself. I can use this to go towards Allah. Not because of that, but you say this is a cool thing to say. Oh, I found a cool story on the internet. Oh, and then you like to look up stats. Let me look up a stat, like a non-Muslim stat. Now I'm gonna show that I have variety, I'm very educated and intelligent. Let me bring in some stories of the past people, whatever it is. So it becomes a temptation to want to speak. As Sheikh Faraz calls it microphone fever, it's mic fever. You wanna get on the mic and you want people to all eyes on me. That's what the Shaitan tries to do with the preacher, right? And they often, so a preacher is often confused for a scholar. They may be scholars, This is why Imam Ghazali is saying that the harms of it. So he continues, he says, illah. So he says, illah, he says, it's, it's, and you know, the other thing is like the preacher, why Imam Ghazali is talking, think about this, right? Especially in their time. It's not like our time, where subhanallah, I mean, if you're on YouTube and you're listening to an Islamic speaker, that's great, awesome. I mean, you're on Instagram or TikTok and you're listening to You know, Shaykh so and so, Ustad so and so, that's great. I'm happy for you. That's a good thing. In their time, the ulama were plentiful. Each village and town had their muhaddith, their mufassir, their faqih, their spiritual teachers, their Sufis, their the Qadi, so they had all the huffab, the Qura, they had the different, Deen was around them. and so preaching began in many ways preaching became something where you would gain a lot of following when everybody's into Deen you know just think about like a very popular speaker from a non-muslim secular let's say secular field so it became a very very popular thing and you'd have a lot of people liking you and then the other thing is that you control a lot of power a popular speaker in a Muslim society Islamic society would have a lot of power so you know you've all heard of the fiery preacher right you know some guy with a skull cap and like this and you know big beard that's the that's the that's the caricature Nawdabilla that they portray in the media but the idea is what they're trying to portray is a person who can give a fiery lecture and whip people up into a frenzy and Get them into a mob mentality as well and you see this as well people who gave a lecture and it was just route like completely riles everybody up and Then they go out in the streets and you know, whatever and then and behave in a way that's not necessarily Islamic this is very unfortunate, right and or you know, very popular lectures, you know people gather to hear a speaker, but that speaker is it's about condemning another group of people basically condemning other Muslims, other scholars, because there's this thing where you want to hear what your, you want to say what your crowd wants to hear. You're not going to discuss something that challenges, that upsets them. That's a preacher will usually want to say things that pleases their crowd. And so this is the, and so there's sometimes as well, there's a need to be controversial. Like I have to say something, kind of push the envelope a little bit or be political. And this is where, you know, it's religious, but it's political, which one is it? So these are all the things that Imam al-Zali is speaking about, right? And so he says, unless, he goes, because the harms of preaching are many, unless you act on what you say first. So unless You act, you first act upon what you say, right? Then preach it to people. So this is the challenge of being a preacher is that you may, the challenge of being a preacher is that you may just, because your job is to speak. And so you're saying a lot of things over, you know, very often, and then the mic's always getting put in your face over and over and over. And so you always have to have an answer. And you may end up saying things that you don't even do yourself. And at some point in time, you know, you may even forget about applying it to yourself and say, look, I've got to give this talk. What am I going to do? People are waiting for me to speak. To the point where, you know, there was a piece of poetry, I actually just, They say that you see a person who doesn't have taqwa, who does not have fear of Allah and he's calling other people to the fear of Allah. It's like seeing a doctor who's treating other people but he himself is sick. This is what it is. And preaching often that could happen because now it becomes an issue of I'm gonna have to tell people they're expecting me to say something. And it's an issue where you yourself are not practicing upon it. But that doesn't mean, as they speak, they say, it doesn't mean that, no, commanding the good and forbidding the evil should be done. So Imam Ghaza, you know, it's not to say that preaching is always wrong, okay? It's not saying that. So Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says, remind other people, Allah says to the Prophet . Because indeed, a remembrance, a reminder benefits the believers. So there is a lot of goodness needed. This religion is giving good advice to people. For who? You know, as the hadith goes on. Who is this religion about giving good advice to? or meaning well to, the rulers of the people and the generality of the people. So preaching is often to the generality of people. But because of the fact that you're speaking and being admired and listened to, it can cause showing off. May Allah protect us and save us. It can cause showboating and glorifying yourself and pride. And, you know, you know, as subhanAllah, our astaad was telling us, you become a scholar and you, you're in the masjid and somebody comes up to you and says, brother so-and-so, or someone introduces you as brother so-and-so, or they just take your name and the shaitan puts inside your heart, you know, you're used to hearing a title attached to your name, Sheikh, Ustaad, CD, whatever doctor, you know, whatever it is. And then you hear, this is how the shaitan, it comes. And if we ever feel that we have to seek refuge in a law from the shaitan, that's what Ibn is talking about and self, self wonder, self admiration. So like, yeah, I gave a really ringing speech that day. So the challenges of it, being that you come like after your talk the way that you assess if you did a good job is not looking at oh Allah did Allah accept what I said? Did I change? Did I actually take this advice and become a better person myself first? No. How'd I do? Good. How was the talk? It was great. You know, oh, you gave a great talk. We were all in tears. And is that the point of giving a talk? Is that the point of calling people to Allah subhana wa ta'ala? And so this is the part of the, and then there's also, anyways, then Imam Ghazali continues, Imam Ghazali continues, and he says, Fatafakkar fee maa qila li Isa . He says, then think a little bit, reflect on that which was said to Isa . You know, it is a narration that they're saying that Jesus said, It was said to him, Ya ibn Maryam, oh son of Maryam, Mary, , preach to yourself. , that's a tongue twister. And if your nafs, if your ego takes the admonition, then preach to other people. , and if not, then have shame in front of your Lord. Right. May Allah forgive us. And he says, right? So Imam Al-Zali is now going to go into this idea that, okay, why? Because now this is another thing, right? This goal of Isa or what was said to Isa Allah says in the Quran, do you in Surah Baqarah, do you command people to good and you don't do it yourself? And Allah says, why do you say Allah says in the Quran? Why do you say things that you do not do yourself? it is something Allah really hates that you say that you say things that you do not do so saying things that you do not do is something very is very disliked Allah and part of the job of the preacher is that they have to give these stories and obviously it's not lost on anyone listening to this that even in teaching this comes up as well and so this is actually a because nowadays as well teaching and preaching are very, very tied in with each other, very tied in with each other. May Allah protect us and save us. And oftentimes a scholar who's a teacher will get called to give some talk somewhere. So this is really every single scholar has to watch out for this. He's not saying don't be a preacher, don't ever give a talk or a lecture. He's saying don't become someone whose primary preoccupation is this, but if you are tried with this, so he continues. If you are tried with this, if you are tested with this job of being a preacher, in other words saying, some scholars will eventually become preachers. right you'll become a speaker on the circuit you'll become an influencer on a YouTube a YouTube speaker if you are tried with this fahtariz ankhasatain then at least avoid two things or desist from two things so if you are tried with this occupation then desist from two things and the first thing he's saying so what are the two things that a preacher should desist from now he's saying okay you've become a preacher or you have to go preach two things you shouldn't do what are those things? So, if akhtar is, Anit tikalluf, fil kalam, bilaibarat, wal aishaarat, wa taamat, wal abiyat, wal ashar, lian Allah ta'ala, yubghidal muta kalifeen. This is from two things. Number one, affectation in speech. What is affectation in speech? It is, he says, it's tikalluf. Tikalluf, it means to force something. to go beyond the natural limit of how you do something. So it's a fake forced style of speaking. So now it could happen that someone, it could happen that someone, for example, they preach, they still give talks a bit differently than they speak, that happens. I've seen that. I've seen people who, you know, they're very, very loud, like, or like very, very expressive in public talks. When you speak to them personally, they're very soft spoken and whatever. And it's like, oh, they speak so soft. You know, you see that. But what is a fake for style? So it is the use of, for example, Imam Ghazali says, the use of expressions that are fake like you don't use those expressions in your normal life right spiritual examples so you're focused on always trying to give spiritual hints right and you wouldn't teach with this for example if you were teaching you would not be like this but you're trying to get the crowd and and you're being fake with wild utterances so like the you know it's hard to explain because we don't really in the West especially we don't have this kind of like necessarily like the itinerant preacher who goes around mosque to mosque to mosque as much anymore. Where they just draw crowds and everybody loves them and whips them up into a frenzy. But you still have this in some places. Whip up the crowd, you know? And so they'll give a wild utterance. Cut the crowd, you know, back and forth, you know, like, you know, you hear this kind of stuff. Like, you know, the asking crowd, the crowd, it's a back and forth with the crowd and they're yelling and shouting. And you're getting energy by that. So wild. And then the preacher just said something and everyone went crazy. Oh my gosh, I can't believe he said that. I can't believe he said that. And so now he's going into a spiritual state, dude, can't control him. Now he's just going off on everybody, calling all the rulers or something like that. So he's just calling everybody out. And then the verses and the rhymes and forced, like you came and you memorized You know, I'll get this line at this time, this line at this time, this line at this time. Oh, I didn't deliver this one, good. Your voice completely changes and you start to, you start to, you see it, just kind of like the whole Sunday morning television, you know. Preachers kind of like go into like a very shrill, weird voice and they modulate their voices, purposely modulating it, you know, then come sometimes going to a whisperer. and talking like this and then all of a sudden going back to this so that keeps the people on the edge of their seats. What else would that be? Like maybe today perhaps maybe it could be sloganeering right so you see this as well where you know you get the crowd into like chanting slogans and chants and cheers in the name of Islam as a way of whipping them up. Mimicry you know in a way to mock your opponent You're like starting to put on these like, you're mimicking people. You're behaving in ways that ulama would not behave. In ways that ulama would not behave. And many times the ulama, when they look at some types of preachers, they cringe. They don't have anything to do with that, that style of preaching. Sometimes it involves making proud claims. Many times when you preach, you have to be careful. and then I went this and then I did this and I told them you are this this this and they said oh sheikh and I said I that's okay I'll talk for Allah I'm nothing you are everything you know stuff like that humble bragging as well you know I am no one I swear I am no one and you know like and like kind of it's humble bragging calling people out putting other people down you know who are like competing with you or groups that are competing with you crowd pleasing Right? Trying to do things, just throw things out so that the crowd goes crazy for you. A crowd baiting as well, bringing up issues that will make them mad. Does that make you mad? Yes. You know, what do you think we're going to do? Get that. You know, like that kind of thing, you know. Rabble rousing, frenzy whipping. This is kind of like, this is not ill. This is not ill. Melhazari is saying, don't get into that. That's the temptation. because the people who get called into, who get followed are the people who can whip people up and make them feel like that. Then Imam Al-Zali takes a little bit of a detour from his two recommendations and he says, Allah hates those people. who are forced, they have takalluf in their speech. Now this doesn't mean, if it can be done naturally, we'll talk about that in a second. So an example of takalluf, I remember this, when we used to do, when we became Muslim, we used to have this kind of like a show, like a dawah show, like a dawah kind of thing that we used to do in auditoriums of masjids and stuff like that, and we did this maybe a couple times where you'd give your speech on how you came to Islam. You stand up on a stage, still on YouTube I think, and how you came to Islam. I remember if you look backstage and the community would come out and listen and they'd be crying, everybody would be affected by it. People would come up and become Muslim, come up on the stage. People would bring their friends, they'd come up and become Muslim. At the end of it, people would come and donate money to your cause or whatever it is. I remember backstage, all the new Muslims that are there practicing lines when they're about to get up. And I remember, okay, you're reviewing your paper. What are you gonna say? I'm gonna say this. That's preaching. You're getting up there giving your story, but you're practicing that line to deliver so that people like what you say. This is what we were doing. And I realize now, it's like, man, that was really bad. And a lot of people, when they go into knowledge, seeking knowledge, when they realize that it's not all bling and glamour. You're not getting called to the conferences and whatever. It's like, it's not a glamorous job necessarily. Then all of a sudden it's like, oh, I don't know about this anymore. You know, may Allah forgive us. So then Imam Ghazali says, He says, being forced and affectatious in your speech that crosses the limits, it shows that you have a ruined inner self. and a heedless heart because you're more worried about impressing other people than looking at where are you in what you're saying to other people. You're not thinking about the fact that you're speaking to Allah. We have to think about that. When we speak, we're speaking to Allah, right? We're speaking to Allah. As Habib Ali said, what did he say? Remember that when you're dealing with other people, You're speaking to Allah through those people, you know? And so when you're trying to put on a show for people and you're affectatious in your speech, then really you're only thinking about how other people receive it. So how can you be thinking about what Allah is thinking about you? And then he says, The meaning of reminding. That a servant remembers the fire of the hereafter what it means to remind someone that a servant remembers the fire of the hereafter and the shortcomings of their own self in serving the creator and that he reflects on the time of his life that he wasted in vain things this is reminders makes you think That makes you emotional. It makes you think and reflect. And it makes you ponder the obstacles ahead for the safety of your faith and the khatima. How are you going to end your life, the end of your life? And how the angel thinking about how will my state be when the angel of death comes to take me. Will he be able to answer munkir and nakir in the grave? Right, he's thinking this is what tathkir should do. And he's thinking about to be concerned, to become concerned with their state in the hereafter. What's going to be my position there? Basically, will he cross the bridge to safety and salvation on the day of judgment or fall into the hellfire below? So this is what now tathkeer is. And these things start just continue in reflecting in a person's heart. This is what reminding is, reminders that are beneficial for the believers. They make the Akhirah come alive. They make Allah, when you hear a person, a spiritual scholar speaking to you, you feel like you are in front of Allah. You feel like Jannah is on your right, Jahannam is on your left, like that's the idea, reflecting on yourself. on your own bad qualities. And so the point of it is for these thoughts to continue in the heart, so it shakes a person out of their complacency in life. Because as life goes on, we all become a little complacent, right? We become complacent. We become complacent and we're like, we're good how we are. So then you start to think, what do I need to change, right? and so this is the thing it shakes you a good it does shake you out of out of your state but it's to make you ask not to get emotional but what can I change and so the boiling the boiling of these flames of these fires inside the soul and reflecting on the boiling of the hellfire and the lamentations of these calamities. What did I waste of my time? What sins did I do? Yallah, forgive me. What have I done? What am I going to do now? How am I going to reach the end? what am I going to do in the end these things when it starts coming up and you start thinking that is called tathkir Imam Al-Ghazali is saying that is the meaning of reminders and then he says then he talks about the meaning of admonition or preaching what is the meaning of admonition it is informing others about these realities that we just talked about and educating them now this is what preaching is Informing others about these realities and educating them. And pointing out people their own shortcomings, how they fall short in this regard. How much have we worked for the Hereafter? How much have we regretted our sins? And then he's saying and making people see Not with their eyes, but with the eyes of their heart, the spiritual insight. Opening up people's spiritual insight to see the flaws of our souls so that we can feel the heat. The people of the majlis can feel the heat of that fire. It's to bring close the realities. That's the whole point. Sometimes you need to hear it from another person. So you make them see the flaws of their egos and make them feel the heat of these fires in the gathering and shaking people so that they try to make up for the days that passed and regret their sins. Somebody asked somebody else. Actually, one of the people involved in Dawah went, talked to a kind of a local preacher and said, you know, you give good talks and you bring in the politics and people get really worked up and they like what you say, but how many times has someone After your talk offer two extra rakas of prayer to Allah subhana wa ta'ala because of what you said That's what he said. He said you give you give a great talk But how many people decided to actually pray a little bit to Allah extra or were you just talking and getting them excited? right and he says then he says And it should also call way to Hassar and it should make you regret the days that passed and regret their sins. So then he says, ... He says, sorry, that was, and he says, so this, all of these things that we just talked about, these points, okay. So this is what you call preaching, what real preaching should be for Allah's sake, right? Then he said, then he gives an example. He says, , just like, He says, just like if you saw a flash flood coming down a mountain that was about to completely immerse and drown a village, like someone's house, it was about to sweep their house, if you saw a flood coming, and this person that you know was inside that house, remember talking about like you know we just had flooding recently right in BC and other places you know they have a tsunami or something it's a serious thing when flood starts coming people get trapped inside their homes they drown what would you tell what would you tell that person if they were inside their house and a flood was coming down a flash flood Fatakulul Hazal Hazal you would say you would say uh warning caution caution danger danger Firumina sail flee from the from the flood Wahal yashti kalbuka fi halil hala So would your heart at that point want to care about informing the owner of that home with affectatious speech? Would you want to like flower your speech and like cool stats and points and you know innuendos and hints at your speech? No! You would never do that. If a flood was coming to someone's house, you would just tell them in plain speech. That's how a person who's preaching should be with people. Speak real, be yourself and speak to people the way that they need to hear that point. Not any other different way. So you should avoid this idea of being fake in your speech. And then he says, well, Khasla Athania. Excuse me. Well, Khasla Athania. Allah takuna himatuka fee wa adika an yana'ir al-halq feemajlisik. And the second point, the second thing that appreciates should desist from So the first point the preacher should desist from is affectation speech. What is the second point? Is that your concern should not be in your preaching that you make people cry in your majlis and bring out wild spiritual states, make them go into spiritual states that they can't control and make people start ripping up their clothes and And they're falling over and you're kind of whipping them up, just so people can say. So what does it mean? It's to be concerned. So you should not be concerned while preaching that people go out, cry out in your talks and go into states. So they say, what an amazing gathering. Yo guy, that was an awesome talk. That was an awesome bayan. It's not about that. It's not about that was such a cool talk, man. You should have heard it, man. We were all in like tears and oh man, it was like just something else. That's not the point of it. You should not be meaning it's, it's not, it's okay if people cry in the Majidist, nothing wrong with that. There's nothing wrong if people even feel extremely moved, nothing wrong with that. But your goal as a preacher should not be that. Excuse me. because all of that trying to get people to react and get emotional all of that is leading towards a dunya and it comes out of heedlessness heedlessness of the heart rather your point should be your entire effort and your concern should be to call people from the dunya from this world to the next life and from sins to obedience of Allah and from greed to abstinence right leaving off the world from stinginess to being generous from and causing taking calling people from doubts to certainty in Allah right in the hereafter and from heedlessness to being alert and awake and conscious of Allah and the realities around them and from being deluded by this life to God consciousness of Allah and you make people love the Akhirah you make people fall in love with the Akhirah and you make people hate the Dunya not talk more about the Dunya not talk more about politically this and that and whatever it's you make people dislike the Dunya meaning loving the things of the Dunya and you teach them the knowledge of worship and abstinence because the overwhelming majority of people he's saying in a in a general crowd would be that their natures do not do not fall in line with with the Sharia with the sacred law their nature does not fall in line with behaving upon it and it doesn't consist it consists a lot of people's behaviors consists of going after things which Allah is not pleased with and getting busied up in low character traits, right? And this is why when a popular preacher whips up a frenzy, gets this crowd into a frenzy, even for a religious purpose, they often go out and do things that are exactly the opposite of what Deen says. So you go and you whip them up about love of Allah, love of the Deen, and we're so jealous for, you know, we're going to defend the Prophet SAW and you whip them up and they go up and I don't know, find some poor non-muslim naudibillah or somebody who's not following the deen and they lynch them or they surround them and harass them that's not right this is not right or you go on a rampage and start throwing bottles and start burning cars this is not the point of this right this is not what preaching should do right and And so cast into people's hearts awe of Allah . And make them feel shaken. And caution them. Of what will come at them, what they will face of the scary things, meaning accountability and so on and punishment and the questioning. So people's inner qualities start to change. and so that the way people behave with other people outwardly begins to get better that's what preaching should do make us better people inside and outside and makes them bring out the desire to do good deeds the greed to do good deeds right and worship and makes people do tauba makes people do tauba, right? This is what Imam al-Ghazali is saying. This is the point. And he says, He says, this is the correct way to preach and to give counsel. So he says, this is the correct way to preach and give counsel. And all preaching that is not like this on this way, Right? Fahuwa waba'alun alaman qalawa samiya then it is a curse or a calamity on the speaker and the listener. All preaching that does not follow what Imam Ghazal is saying, he's saying is like, it's a calamity, it's a curse on the one who's saying it and those who are listening. Because they think that's Deen and he thinks that's Deen and he thinks he's being good and they think that they're getting somewhere and they're not benefiting from it. They're not benefiting in the real way they could. And he said, it's a ghul. A ghul in Arabic is a ghul, like a goblin, like a ghost. It is a devil. It is a demon and a devil, that type of preaching. It takes people away from the right path. And it destroys them. And then what happens is people get so addicted to that kind of fiery preaching when a scholar comes and tries to teach them, guess what? Too boring, talks too slow, talks too soft, I fall asleep in his dars. They don't want to take a class, they want to hear whip me up, whip me up, get me emotional, get me something, entertain me basically. whereas when the scholar comes oh I don't take a class I don't want to learn something I don't actually you know they won't do it because you you actually train them that this is Deen to like this stuff you know and so he says that so it is to flee from this type of stuff right because the amount of corruption that a preacher can do to people's understanding even the shaitan himself could not do that much harm to people's religion why because the shaitan is a whisper whispers in your mind and then you get an inclination to do something you don't see the shaitan you don't hear the shaitan it's a whisper but and the temptation but a preacher who goes off into their own kind of like you know, ego trip and that kind of thing, they could say the wrong thing and destroy people's deen and their behavior. So they can do something Shaytar can't do. Uman kanat lahu yadun waqudra, and so whoever has the ability and authority, notice the two things, authority, yad, and ability. Yajib alayhi an yunzilah an manabir al muslimeen, an yunzilahu an manabir al muslimeen, so therefore it is obligatory On those in power to remove those preachers who don't follow this method of preaching from the pulpits of the Muslims. SubhanAllah. Think about that. and forbid him. from what he is doing. So now it is from commanding the good and forbidding the evil, those rabble rousing preachers or the preachers who are just about entertaining people and not calling them towards real reflection, entertaining people basically. I mean, subhanAllah, they were strict in this time. I mean, these days you wouldn't discourage people who are getting a religious talk because that's what they have for their deen. But remember, he's talking at a time when hearing a religious talk might actually distract you from doing more religious things. Whereas now we're in a time where if someone's on YouTube listening to a speaker who's talking about Deen, just leave them. That's okay, right? Because what they would be doing otherwise would be worse. In Imam Ghazali's time, people were fasting, reading Quran, doing all these things, so drawing their attention towards an emotional talk would actually be worse for them sometimes. Right. Remember, this is the day before TV. This is before, you know, going out for coffee, whatever people didn't have. This is what they had to do is to go to listen to talks, visit their family. And the rest was worship, worship, right of a law and gatherings of dhikr, things like this. So he's saying that people and this is why is what people don't realize governments have a right to control who's preaching. People think that government has absolutely no role. And they get upset when the government starts to, I mean, whatever country, starts to try to curb a popular speaker who's whipping people up into a frenzy and getting them to kind of get out of control, not follow the law. So then they're like, oh, how come the government is trying to tell this person not to speak? And yes, there are times when obviously governments do the wrong thing, they do it for the wrong reasons, or they try to stop a good scholar from speaking. That's obviously the case as well. That's bad and wrong. And you'll see what later on Iman Ghazali talks about rulers. But they do have a right if there's a threat or if there's a harm to people's religion to curb them. In fact, it's upon them to do that. and to take them off the Mimbar, if that's the case. So they do have a right to control, you know, harm from happening. And then Ibn al-Wazali continues, ... And the third point to desist from, ... Do not mingle with the princes and the rulers. A scholar should not mingle with the princes and the rulers, ... Or even look at him. Do not mingle with the princely rules or even look at them. Because looking at them, sitting with them, and mixing with them is a huge calamity. Indeed, why is that the case? You have to remember something. Imam al-Ghazali is speaking at a time you know, not when it's like the righteous caliphate and you know, the Sahaba are in control and the glorious Khalif. It's the Muslim world has descended into being about princes vying for power, the Sultan and the kind of like people many times unfortunately ruling for themselves or their dynasty or their family. And a lot of the princes of different principalities they became in power by taking over power they tax people so a lot of their wealth is not would not in in this according to this there's a lot of oppression so it's almost like Imam Al Gazali is saying his reality that they were living in was that the rulers are oppressors always almost always and that's why you should never mix with the ruler he doesn't say if they're religious or not religious don't mix with them why because he's almost saying because you should not mix with oppressors and rulers are oppressors because don't they kill their opponents don't they jail people who they are threats to them like their personal power do they not take people take take money and estates and wealth away from people don't they tax people don't they jail their opponents and anyone who criticizes them goes to jail don't they take don't do they ever take you know the desires of the country and stuff for themselves and the resources and the wealth of the Muslims for themselves. So he's saying don't even mingle with those types of people. And many times because they're at the seat of power, all of the worst elements of society are vying for their attention. Mercenaries who kill for hire, whether it's businessmen who are unscrupulous, those who are involved in entertainment and those who are involved in pleasures and desires. things like that right so this is why he's saying don't mix with those people do not mix with them anything walo ibduli tabi haatha he goes and and he says and if you are tried with this so he's actually saying that you may have to mingle with the rulers sometimes you may get called by a king or something like that but if you're tried with this daaan kamat hahum wathanaahum he says skip praising them and lauding them Don't praise them. Oh king, you are like this. Oh prince, you are the best. You are the most virtuous. You are the most noble. Stop praising them. And then don't laud them. You did this for everyone. You did this for everyone. Don't butter them up. He goes, because Allah becomes angry when a sinner, a fasiq or a , a tyrant or an oppressor is praised. and many times this happens you get into you know you got now the royal iftar and the scholars have to come and you know basically show that they're subservient to the king and pretend to praise him and what he's done and you know masha'Allah and you know all this kind of stuff and he says waman da'ali tohli baka'i him faqal ahaba and yasallahu fi arzuhi he says and whoever prays for the prolonged reign of these rulers loves also loves that Allah be disobeyed on the earth that's what Imam Al-Ghazali is saying so you shouldn't even pray he's saying you should not pray for the prolonged reign of princes and rulers don't pray for them to be you know oh may you always be a you know because if that person is doing something wrong remember again what are we saying he said in Imam Al-Ghazali's historical context and understanding It is like a given that people who come into political power will misuse it as tyrants. And so you're praying for a dictator, basically, a tyrant, let's say. And basically by you praying that Allah always keeps him in his position, you're saying that you want his tyranny to continue and continue and continue. Obviously they're not talking about the exception where there is a just, noble, religious, pious, God-fearing ruler. or in a situation where the Muslims may have a political interest in to preserve their practice and their protective community in mixing with leadership. They're not talking never, ever, ever, like especially in Western countries. Again, it depends. If it's for the benefit of your community, many scholars will interact with the leaders and the governments. But he's saying once you start to mingle with them, get chummy with them, This is why in the past, the spiritual scholars, when, you know, like you have the big spiritual masters of India, you have Nizamuddin Awliya and you have all these huge, huge, lofty scholars and saints who spread Islam all over the subcontinent. And when the emperor used to send them invitation, I'm not coming, call them to the court, I don't want to come. You come. And this is why in some places, the emperor themselves, they would come to the doors. This is why there's a saying, you know, when you see the emperor, the king, the ruler at the door of the saint, then what an amazing ruler and what an amazing saint. Because it must be somebody pious to not take the invitation of the king. And the king must be someone very humble. to come barefoot, you know, to come to the house or the zawiya or the khanqa or the madrasah of the scholar. And when you see the scholar at the doors of the rulers, let me in, let me in, I wanna mix with you, I wanna be your buddy, give me a position. He goes, then what a bad scholar that is and what a bad ruler that is as well, who uses their position and power to surround themselves. with scholars this is why the scholars hated to become Qadi in traditionally they were whipped and they didn't want to become Qadi I'm talking about the Imams Imam Abu Hanifa Imam Malik you know and then others later on they took the positions because they knew someone had to do that to serve the Muslims and he's saying and then he says and the fourth thing to desist from so the first thing do not debate Second thing, do not be a preacher. Third thing, do not mingle with rulers. Fourth thing is, do not accept their gifts. That you do not accept anything, anything, right? Do not accept any grants or gifts of the rulers from princes basically, from princes. Even if you know it is from the halal wealth. Because a lot of the wealth would be taken from people and belongs to the Muslims, not their wealth, to live in opulence. But let's say you knew this prince was, had their own business, halal money. They grew their own vegetables, okay? And their own seeds, you know, they got their own seeds. He said don't accept money from them, don't do it. SubhanAllah, look at the taqwa of Ima Ghazali. He is saying ... Because he says why? Sorry, he says why? Because being desirous of their gifts spoils religiosity. It spoils your deen. Because being greedy for what they have, the rulers have, because rulers have more than most people have, they can give you a good position. They can make you the head of this, that, they can appoint all the khatibs, the imams, they can give you money for your project because it causes psychophancy. It is basically aka boot licking and fawning over a ruler. Oh, noble king, thou art the one who, you know, is the shade of the whole, you know, that kind of behavior, you know, and the king is like, you know, and then what does it also do? It causes deference to their views. So the king's like, yeah, what do you think about, you know, and then he has some kind of like wacky idea in religion. But because the ulama are all around him, they can't say no. No one can tell the prince, the ruler, you know, no one can tell him that this is not an Islamic idea. We have to let him do it, right? And so what happens? You have difference to their views. Hey, what do you guys think if we have a concert inside the masjid and have people mixing inside the masjid? What do you think about that? And then all of a sudden you become like, Oh, I don't know if I can say the truth to him now because I'm really close to him. I might get kicked out of my position or I might get... So then you start to prefer their views. A ruler comes and says, You know, this interest, riba, We need to make a hala for the Muslims because we need them to invest and we need them to do this. Can you make a fatwa that says XYZ? This happened as well. Scholars were tried with this in the past. The ruler wants to marry more than this many wives or whatever. Hey, I need a fatwa from you to do this. I need a fatwa, I need to eliminate one of my political opponents. Can you give a fatwa that this person's ***** so I can do whatever? And so you start deferring to their views. an agreement with their views and agreement with their oppression agreement with their oppression so now they are jailing people and slaughtering them in the streets and doing whatever and and you're like yeah well you know you start agreeing with them and this war this unjust war that they're fighting in XYZ country sometimes against Muslims you know you are now in other words you become a a scholar of the palace right you become you become a royal scholar now right that's very dangerous as they used to say all this is corruption in your religion and the least of the harms of mixing with the rulers he goes the least of the harms of accepting gifts from rulers is that if you benefit from them, then you will start to love them. Once you accept their gift and start to benefit from their dunya, you start to love them. And whoever loves someone, When you love someone, you want for them to always be around and to prolong their benefit to you. You want to keep getting that stipend, that grant, that special gift. the special positions and you want all your kids to get it too and you want this and you want that so you want them to be around because you love them and by loving a tyrant you love oppression on Allah's servants and you love the ruin of society not society the world because tyranny It takes away justice. That ruins society and ruins the world. And by loving an oppressor, by taking things that they have, you begin to love the oppression of Allah's servants. Just imagine that. A person who unjustly, a scholar who rubber stamps an unjust war is actually rubber stamping the killing and the oppression of innocent people. May Allah protect us from ever getting in that situation and guide our scholars and our rulers out from that. So what is worse for your deen and your hereafter than being the cause of, you know, than this. And so beware, beware that you are fooled and deceived by the whispering of the Shaitaan. What does that mean? Do not be fooled. Don't be fooled with the Shaitaan's trick by what some people say to you. ... ... ... And he said, Do not be fooled by what some people say. It's better to take the money of the rulers and spend it on the poor, rather than they spend it on Haram. Because he's saying the rulers will spend it on Haram. So rather than they spend it on Haram, might as well take their money they're giving you and spend it on the poor. Great. He's saying, Because the shaitan has cut the necks of so many people with this waswasa. You're taking money from an oppressor, from a compromised source. Well, I'm going to do good with it. But you don't realize you rubber stamp that person's oppression. You become attached and beloved to this person. And now if you cut off my funding, my project's finished. What am I going to do? That's what you do. And you say, I can't speak about this injustice. I can't tell them, King, what you're doing is haram. I do recognize the great privilege that I'm in right now to be in a country where I can say this kind of things. But there are many scholars who wouldn't even be able to read these words. They wouldn't even be able to read this book. And so how would you expect them if they got close to rulers and took money from them? Because once you take money, you're compromised. You have a debt that you owe to someone, you know, so make sure when you take a gift from somebody that you can, that you don't mind being influenced by them as well. And so then finally he says, and he says, and the calamity and harm of doing this, of this mentality that I'm just gonna take the tainted money from tainted sources from the rulers. I'm not going to fall in love with the rulers. I'm going to spend it on the poor. This is a trick of shaitan. In fact, the big spiritual masters of the past would not even take anything from the rulers. The rulers would send bags of gold. Bags of gold. Did you know this? That the rulers would actually, the emperor would bring dinars and dinars and dinars at the houses of, at the Khanqa, at the spiritual lodge of people like Nizamuddin Awliya and other people. Here, take all the wealth. I'm donating. They wouldn't want to touch it. They could take it and feed all the poor. I don't want anything. But they would like the poor man who has two gold coins, if he came with one, they would take that because it's Barakah. When you take from people whose wealth is halal, their niya is pure, there's barakah. When you take from people whose wealth is tainted, there's no barakah in that. You sell out your deen. He says, so there's a lot of widespread calamities by doing this. And then he says, . He says, and we've mentioned this all. So many have been misled by this. The harms are great. And finally, last line, for more, see Ikhya alumuddin. That's Imam Al Ghazali himself is saying. If you want more information on this, see Ikhya alumuddin. And then he goes into, right? So what are the four things that you do not accept from? Now we'll take questions. So if you have any questions, please type them into the chat box. So what were the four things that Imam Al Ghazali said do not do? Do not accept gifts from rulers, do not debate, do not be a preacher, do not mingle with rulers and do not accept their gifts. But in each of those things he said, but if you have to debate, do it this way. If you have to be a preacher, do it this way. If you have to mingle with rulers, do it this way. But he never said to accept gifts that you do it this way. 'Cause many times as well, even in Western countries, you might get a grant to do something, but you have to make sure. right I mean there's obviously a very different siasa or way you have to consult senior scholars I'm not gonna say that in this case I'm not applying it to a modern context consult your ulama and the elders of our communities as to how they work with the with people but you have to make sure that you're not rubber stamping some kind of legislation that ends up harming Muslims in another way or something like that so may Allah make it easy you know this is the end of the book last class is the next class is the last class and out of the eight things he's going to talk about four things to do and concluding prayer so it's heavy because it's the final advice he's giving the students so may Allah make us act on these advices and benefit from them and draw closer to Allah when we listen to these things because it's not just about scholars and preachers it's about what can we learn for ourselves to draw closer to Allah and become more sincere are there any questions
