# The Freedom to Disagree

The Islamic world at the close of the third century of the Muhammadan Hijra bore, as I read it, the stamp of its sciences, its philosophy, and its literature. New currents, tangled doctrinal disagreements, and an unending theological argument governed its cultural sphere and its learned society, coming to rest with no single party and settling in no single place. How useful it is, then, for the researcher who wishes to study in depth the origins of those differences to try to weigh the opinions of the writers and scholars who lived in that distant age. They left scientific traces and novel modes of expression suited to their time and to their understanding of philosophical questions, and to the reach of their effort in interpreting texts and construing verses, so that from all this he may form a reasonable view through which he passes to reality and to the truth.

Those disputes, more often than not, spilled beyond the oral discussions that used to be raised in the salons and the scientific centers, growing into long treatises that showed themselves upon the pages of books and pamphlets. Among the sects that contributed a large share to this field were the Ismailis. Yet it is very strange to me that we do not see this group finish its theological argument with the other groups before it comes forward and plunges into another argument, of an altogether new kind. It is an argument among the very men who summoned others to their cause. In this there is a clear proof of an intellectual freedom that prevailed in their lives, a release from the constraints that dominate conservative societies and that draw a boundary around them, binding them to no irregularity and to no departure from the old inherited plan.

The first argument, or in more precise terms the first scientific discussion, that opened new horizons for the Ismailis and carried them into an atmosphere of far-reaching scientific liberation, and made them a subject of conjecture and hearsay throughout the Islamic world, was the appearance of the book *al-Mahsul* (The Harvest). This book was put into circulation at the beginning of the fourth century AH, the tenth AD, and is attributed to the great Syrian preacher

> محمد بن احمد النسفي

Muhammad ibn Ahmad al-Nasafi, who had the credit of turning the Samanid state toward Ismailism and who was put to death in the year 331 AH (942 AD), as is stated in the book

> الفرق بين الفرق

*al-Farq bayn al-Firaq* (The Difference Between the Sects) by its author Abd al-Qahir al-Baghdadi. It is very strange to me that the Proof of the Two Iraqs, its greatest preacher and its supreme philosopher,

> حميد الدين احمد الكرماني

Hamid al-Din Ahmad al-Kirmani, who discussed the subject and went deeply into examining it, does not come to mention the author of *al-Mahsul* at all. His discourse was directed instead upon

> أبي حاتم الرازي ، وأبي يعقوب السجستاني

Abu Hatim al-Razi and Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani. There must, then, be fundamental reasons of their own for this silence, reasons that justify it, and perhaps the book *al-Mahsul* is attributed to al-Nasafi in error.

However that may be, the acclaim that the book *al-Mahsul* won among the thinkers of the Ismailis and the ranks of their scholars at that time spurred Abu Hatim al-Razi, the foremost preacher in northwestern Persia, to compose a book in which he discussed what had come in *al-Mahsul*. He named his book *al-Islah* (The Correction). It is plain that the opinions al-Razi advanced provoked a reaction in another great preacher named Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani, who held them contrary to the truth and to first principles, and this is what led him to set about composing a book in which he challenged al-Razi's views. He named it *al-Nusra* (The Defense), and in it the author upheld *al-Mahsul* and attacked Abu Hatim al-Razi without mercy. It appears that *al-Nusra* is among al-Sijistani's earliest works, as al-Kirmani hints in his book. Not long afterward, al-Kirmani surveyed the whole subject in a full survey and composed his precious treatise *al-Riyad*, a judgment between the two reformers, as he called them, that is, between the authors of

> الاصلاح والنصرة

*al-Islah* and *al-Nusra*. With surpassing skill he appraised the opinions that had come in the three books and criticized them by a scholarly criticism, setting them beside the

> قانون الدعوة الهادية

Law of the Guiding Mission, or in other words beside the official philosophical and doctrinal theories of the Fatimid court of his day.

It is also worth remarking on the scientific ideas that these works contain. A philosophical body of this kind deserves to be studied, compared, and scrutinized deeply, but by ill fortune the two books

> المحصول والنصرة

*al-Mahsul* and *al-Nusra* have been lost. As for the book *al-Islah* by al-Razi and *al-Riyad* by al-Kirmani, they are still preserved.
