# The Two Rivals

The Two Rivals

Two men stand opposed at the heart of this inquiry, and a third stands between them as judge. The two are Abu Hatim al-Razi and Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani; the one who weighs them is al-Kirmani, who composed his *al-Riyad* precisely to sit in judgment over the two contenders, the authors of

> الاصلاح والنصرة

*al-Islah* and *al-Nusra*. With fine skill he appraised the views set out in their works and measured them against

> قانون الدعوة الهادية

the guiding law of the da'wa. The debate itself had been carried in

> المحصول والنصرة

*al-Mahsul* and *al-Nusra* before al-Kirmani took it up and rendered his verdict.

Kitab al-Riyad

Al-Kirmani's *al-Riyad* is one of the important works that express the philosophical theories of Ismailism in the fourth century AH. Before I enter into what it contains by way of opinions, sayings, arguments, and statements, I must first set down a brief account of the lives of the three philosophers who took part in the discussion, namely al-Razi, al-Sijistani, and al-Kirmani.

Al-Razi

He is Abu Hatim Ahmad ibn Hamdan al-Laythi al-Warsanani al-Razi, honored in Ismaili circles as "our master Abu Hatim." He was a preacher of Ismailism in the land of Rayy, then moved to Baghdad and made it his residence. The date of his birth is not known exactly. His work in the da'wa fell during the imamate of Muhammad al-Mahdi Billah (Ubayd Allah), the founder of the Fatimid state in the Maghrib. He was distinguished by the sweetness of his speech and by a famed eloquence. He won over al-Marwazi, the prince of Rayy, who had been a strict Sunni, and he persuaded the princes of those regions to enter Ismailism, until he became one of the standards of politics and religion and one of the guides of the Islamic scientific renaissance in the late third and early fourth centuries AH. His refuge was the theological and philosophical sciences. The Orientalist Paul Kraus said of him:

> كان من كبار دعاة الاسماعيلية ولعب دوراً هاماً في الشؤون السياسية في طبرستان والديلم ولا سيما في الري واصفهان حتى استجاب له كبار رجال الدولة مثل اسفار بن شيرويه ومرداويخ القائد وغيرهما

He was one of the leading preachers of the Ismailis and played an important role in political affairs in Tabaristan and Daylam, especially in Rayy and Isfahan, until the chief statesmen responded to him, men such as Asfar ibn Shirawayh, Mardawij the commander, and others. In truth, Abu Hatim al-Razi was a standard of the scientific renaissance not within Ismailism alone but in the Islamic world at large. He spread philosophical teachings throughout the eastern lands, and above all within the sphere of the general Islamic culture. For all of this he was not spared the persecution of his enemies in Daylam, and he was forced into hiding in the last years of his life. He died in 322 AH, after the Fatimid al-Qa'im took charge of the affairs of the Ismaili imamate in the Maghrib, having lived, as some historians say, sixty-two years.

He was a contemporary of Abu Bakr Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi, the famous physician and author of the well-known philosophical views in which he broke with many of Aristotle's theories, natural and metaphysical, denying any reconciliation of philosophy and religion and holding that philosophy is the sole path to the reform of the individual and of society. Between the two Razis there were violent and repeated debates, attended by scholars and by political leaders. Abu Hatim recorded these debates in his book *A'lam al-Nubuwwa*, the Signs of Prophethood; and although he does not name the man he criticizes, calling him only "the atheist," there is conclusive evidence that this atheist was none other than Abu Bakr al-Razi.

The great philosopher al-Kirmani, Hujjat al-Iraqayn, noted in his *al-Aqwal al-Dhahabiyya*, the Golden Sayings, that debates on prophethood and the legal rites took place between Abu Bakr al-Razi and Abu Hatim in Rayy in the days of Mardawij and in his very presence, and that Abu Hatim was able to confound Abu Bakr and to refute his views in *A'lam al-Nubuwwa* across pages overflowing with charm and mastery, closing off against the arrogant and the stubborn every road of evasion and flight.

His most important work is *al-Zina*, on the Arabic letters, their derivations, the reasons for their forms, and the meanings of words. It is a great book on authentic and borrowed Arabic vocabulary, the vocabulary in which the Qur'an was articulated and which the Muslims gave legal force, and from which Islamic terminology took shape. It runs to twelve hundred pages, and he dedicated it to the Fatimid imam who succeeded Muhammad al-Mahdi Billah (Ubayd Allah). To him belong as well the books *A'lam al-Nubuwwa*, *al-Islah*, *al-Jami'*, and others.

Al-Sijistani

Abu Ya'qub Ishaq al-Sijistani, also called al-Sijzi, stands at the forefront of the scholars who struggled and labored and gave themselves over to establishing cosmic philosophical principles upon firm doctrinal foundations, sound scientific bases, and fixed pillars that do not tremble whatever crises befall them. He was among those who sacrificed all they possessed to spread these teachings and to carry them into other lands, until late in his life he was accused of unbelief and atheism by the conservative public, and was at last killed for the sake of his faith. He played a major role in philosophy and rendered the highest intellectual service in the third century of the Hijra, and his intellectual imprint appears in his disciple Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani, Hujjat al-Iraqayn, who followed his method, called to his teachings, and drank from the flow of his springs. Once we know that al-Kirmani studied philosophy in al-Sijistani's school of thought, we may place al-Sijistani in the first rank among the celebrated Muslim scholars, thinkers, and philosophers of the world.

He lived alongside the esoteric Ismaili da'wa in the Age of Manifestation, the time when the Fatimid state flourished and emerged as an Islamic state of civilizational, scientific, social, and political stature. Yet he lived among a people whose doctrine differed from his own, and so he was compelled to take taqiyya as a cover and to move and preach with the greatest caution. For this reason his life has come down to us wrapped in a certain ambiguity, and we are not to be blamed if we cannot know his biography in full. This obscurity is not his alone. We have received only a little about the great preacher al-Nasafi, al-Nakhshabi, the author of *al-Mahsul*, beyond what authors mention of his efforts and of his contact with Nasr ibn Ahmad the Samanid in Transoxiana, until that Samanid embraced the Ismaili da'wa. We know little, too, of Abu Hatim al-Razi, the linguist and author of the oldest work in the science of the Arabic language, *al-Zina*; and little of Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani himself, despite the survival of most of his writings, for had al-Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din Hibatallah al-Shirazi, the friend and interlocutor of Abu al-Ala al-Ma'arri, not written his biography in his own hand, we should have known nothing of him. So it is with the great men of the Ismaili da'wa, its hujjas and its island preachers in Syria, Iran, Yemen, and elsewhere: their lives are shrouded in mystery, and the books in which they set down their own biographies have been lost, only a few of them surviving.

He is traced to Sijistan, a province in the south of Khurasan, and to a Persian family said to descend from the Persian hero Rustam, though some say he was of Iraqi origin and that his grandfather came from Kufa and settled in Sijistan. Some researchers who have studied his philosophy claim that he died in 331 AH, but this does not accord with the historical facts, for it is known that al-Sijistani was the teacher of al-Kirmani, and al-Kirmani remained alive until the year 411 AH. At what time, then, could al-Kirmani have studied the philosophical sciences of the da'wa under him? There is an explicit statement in al-Sijistani's own *al-Iftikhar* that he composed it in 360 AH, and *al-Iftikhar* is in turn mentioned in al-Kirmani's *al-Riyad*. He was a preacher in the province of Bukhara during the caliphate of the imam المعز الدين الفاطمي (al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah al-Fatimi), which means that he was a contemporary of the great preacher جعفر بن منصور اليمني (Ja'far ibn Mansur al-Yamani) and of the learned jurist, the qadi النعمان بن محمد بن حيون المغربي التميمي (al-Nu'man ibn Muhammad ibn Hayyun al-Maghribi al-Tamimi), chief judge of the Fatimid state, and of other great authors and scholars of the da'wa in that golden and radiant age of learning. Nothing testifies to al-Sijistani's scholarly worth so much as the books he left behind, written in Arabic, with a portion of them composed in Persian.

He left a prolific body of scholarly writing that ranks among the deepest ever composed in philosophy, more than thirty titles in number. Among the most famous are

> أثبات النبوات

*Ithbat al-Nubuwwat*, the Proofs of Prophecy; *Kashf al-Mahjub*, the Unveiling of the Veiled; *Tuhfat al-Mustajibin*, the Masterpiece of the Respondents; and a work he divided into forty springs, *yanabi'*, which has come to be regarded as a book whose depth is rarely surpassed. He appears to have composed it for a particular audience, the preachers and those who hold the highest ranks of the da'wa, men whose philosophical studies had reached their summit. His reason for dividing it into forty springs goes back to his wish that each spring should interpret one of the forty limits who compose the highest council of the da'wa.

Among his other books, mentioned by the great traveler and Persian poet Nasir-i Khusraw in his *Zad al-Musafirin*, are these: *The Foundations of the Da'wa*; *The Interpretation of the Laws*; *The Iris of Blessings*, or *The Iris of Survival*; *The Brilliant Message*; the *Kitab al-Iftikhar*; *The Scales*, divided into nineteen scales; *The Ladder of Salvation*; *al-Nusra*, The Victory; *The Hooks*; *Amusements of Sorrows*; *Secrets of the Return*; *Sermons on Ethics*; *The Stranger on the Meaning of the Elixir*; *Sociable of Hearts*; *Composition of Spirits*; *Security from Confusion*; *Closets of Evidence*; *The Proof*; and others.

In what follows I summarize al-Sijistani's views on the divine as he expressed them across most of his writings.

He holds that the Originator of all originated things is an Ancient Creator, Exalted and deeply rooted in the bringing forth of the primordial, and that the world of beings and originated things is itself brought into being in time; for were it not so, something must have preceded it that brought it into being, and were the world ancient and prior to the Creator, it would be impossible for His omnipotence to attach to what is ancient, or for His existence to attach to nothingness, and it would have required a maker to make it. He transcends the grasp of every attribute: He is not attained by sense, does not fall under the gaze, is not perceived by sight, is not confined within a genus, does not occur to conjecture, and is not seen by the eyes; He is not described by the senses, nor grasped by analogy, nor likened to men. He is far removed from any contrary that opposes Him, any equal that matches Him, or any likeness of anything. Exalted is He above resembling things that are bounded. The imaginations are bewildered in describing His omnipotence, the understandings fall short of characterizing His kingdom, and sight is dulled before the perception of His greatness. He has no like and no likeness; He is without equal and without opposite, for an opposite is only opposed by what stands against it. He has pointed to His identity through His creation, and to His names through His prophets. The intellect has no field in which to reach His heaven, nor any way to liken Him, since to liken the Originator to what He originates is impossible. He is the cause of every existent, for He is the Originator of originators and the Inventor of inventions, the cause of the being of all beings, the Lord of everything, its Creator, its Perfecter, and the One who carries it to the best of its states. He is too majestic to be bounded by thought or encompassed by measure. He has no names, for names were coined for the things He brought into being; and He has no attributes, for attributes belong to essences. The letters of language cannot reach the utterance of His name, nor can any of them be applied to Him, since they are all among the things He invented, and all the names He created He made names for the things He originated. He is Ancient, before all eternity, the Owner of the source of primacy in the order of being, for from Him the first limit sprang forth and the first existent overflowed. He is the Originator of originators, the Cause of causes, the Maker of what is made, the Everlasting whose existence subsists by His own oneness and self-sufficiency, the possessor of the first act of bringing forth, which is the first Number, which He made the origin of all numbers, just as He made the Intellect the origin of all existents and made the Speaker the origin of the world of religion. To all of this it is added that He is attained by no attribute; He is not a body, nor within a body; no reasoning mind conceives His essence, no sense perceives Him; He is not an image, nor matter, and there is nothing in any language by which He may be declared. He exists, but it is not correct to say that He exists after the manner of those existents that came into being from Him. As for the proof of Him, it is drawn from the existence of other existents, in that there is no effect without a cause and nothing exists except by what necessitates its existence; the existents rest one upon another in their being, and some of those upon which others rest are themselves not fixed in existence.

Al-Sijistani then turns to the existents in their order and sequence, and says:

The Originator brought nothing into being at the first of creation except the Intellect, and He gathered within its substance the forms of all originated things. To the Intellect is given the name "the Pen," because it is by the pen that the inscriptions of creation appear from the beginning. It is called "the Throne," that is, the seat of the one who sits upon it, whose majesty is known by his sitting to be above whoever is beneath him. It is called "the First," meaning that it is the primacy from which creatures came forth, everything that exists and everything stamped upon it, and that it is first in receiving the effects of wisdom before the remaining limits, because of its nearness to the source and its union with it, which is knowledge and command taken as one meaning. It may therefore be said that the act of the Intellect precedes its power, a virtue found in no other existent, for all the limits below it have their powers preceding their acts, while this virtue belongs to the Intellect alone, so that by it the Intellect is complete and perfect. It is called "the Decree," in that by the Intellect the soul reaches the perception of what it learns and the attainment of what it seeks, and it may be said that the Intellect is the decree of God, mighty and exalted, among His creation. It is called *al-hayuli*, prime matter, meaning that by the Intellect stands firm whatever gushes forth of the forms. And it is called "the Sun," meaning that by the Intellect the realities are seen.

Then comes the Soul, the second creation, which gushed forth from the first. It is named "Soul," *nafs*, because it forever breathes, *yatanaffas*, to draw benefit, and the constancy of that breathing is the standing frame of creation. The Soul is called "the Tablet," meaning that what breaks forth from the Intellect of the lights of wisdom is inscribed upon the Soul, and from the Soul it is joined to the flow issuing from it, according to the measure of its purity and refinement. It is called "the King," meaning that the Soul is the property and possession of the Intellect, for by the Soul the virtue of the Intellect appeared, just as by the servant the virtue of the master appears. It is called "the Follower," meaning that the one who follows the Intellect in receiving the effects of the Word is the Soul, and it may be said that the Soul by its power follows the Intellect in its act. It is called "Destiny," meaning that whatever of the benefits of the Intellect unites with the Soul, estimation and determination encompass it. And it is called "the Image," meaning that the Soul was formed from the very substance and radiance of the Intellect, and that whenever it aspires to rejoin the Intellect and to take its station, its own light is effaced, just as the moon draws its light from the light of the sun, and when the two meet at one station the moon's light is effaced. Of the Intellect and the Soul together it is said, in a single word, "the Two Principles."

These are some of al-Sijistani's philosophical views on the divine, which I have presented in brief and joined to what I have been able to recover of his life. They give, perhaps, the decisive proof of his command of the sciences and of his mastery in setting out his texts in an attractive order and an exquisite arrangement.

Hamid al-Din Ahmad al-Kirmani

An extraordinary scholarly figure whose life is enveloped in obscurity; a great philosopher who lived in a radiant age of learning; a noble preacher who traced across the pages of thought the soundest inquiries and the deepest lines, and who left to the generations a body of works that can only be called a precious treasure and an enduring legacy. The philosophers of the Islamic world consider him the greatest scholar the Ismaili school produced.
