# The Fruit of Two Worlds

The fifth book of the Riyad concerns the judgment between the two disputants, upon the question of human beings being the fruit of the physical world, and it is of this that I now speak.

In the first section of this book, the author of al-Islah said:

Man is the fruit of this whole world, and it is for his sake that this world was created in all its parts: its origins and its foundations. The first of these is the Hayula, which is the principle of the individuals that are born of it by motion and rest; then the individuals, which are the foundation of the vehicles; then the compounds, which are the very productions of this whole world; and the natures out of which the form of the human being is composed, the form prepared to receive the three souls, which are the vegetative, the sensitive, and the speaking.

The author of al-Nusrah said:

To say that human beings are the fruit of this world is likewise the saying of the materialists, those who did not affirm the survival of the soul after the dissolution of bodies. For if human beings were the fruit of this world, this world would have held him fast and would not have let him pass to another world.

But we would say:

Human beings are the fruit of the highest world, the honorable and illuminating world. For this reason the prophets (عليهم السلام) came with their warning, that men might provide themselves for the passage from the house of mortality to the house of survival, and from this world to the abode of the Return. For the prophets knew that this world is not a home, and that man is not the fruit of this world. So the author of al-Nusrah said.

We say:

Each of the two is truthful in what he said from one side, and each is untruthful from another. The side on which they are both truthful is that each of them has said of human beings what truly belongs to him. The side on which they are both untruthful is that each denies the other its share, denies, that is, that man bears the title of fruit of both worlds together. For human beings issue from between the two worlds. From this world man receives his first perfection, and from that world his second. The end of the natural world is to give its existent his first perfection, which is the bringing forth of the bodily form by way of the circling bodies, the luminous planets, and the proximate causes, into the disposition by which he is ready to accept what belongs to him. And how could he not accept it, when he is that world's fruit, beyond which there is well nigh nothing. The end of that higher world is to give to what has been received from the existents of the natural world its second perfection, which is the effusion upon the spiritual image, the thing naturally disposed and intrinsic to it, by which it becomes substantial and endures: the knowledge of the Oneness of Allah Almighty by means of all the hudud (عليهم السلام), and obedience to them in the two modes of worship, in knowledge and in deed. That is man's fruit. What corrects what we have said in this matter is the saying of Mawlana Amir al-Mu'minin al-Mu'izz li-Din Allah Ma'ad ibn Isma'il (ع) in the book *The Interpretation of Sharia* (كتاب تأويل الشريعة), that man is the purpose of the second world and the end of the action of nature.

Now to the second section, concerning the objection of the author of al-Nusrah, that if human beings were the fruit of this world, this world would have held him fast and would not have let him pass from it to another world. By this very objection he has handed his opponent the means to turn the matter back upon him.

For his opponent says:

If, as you have said, man is the fruit of the higher world, then that world would hold him fast and would not let him return to these persons, so that he should forget, which is impossible, according to your own writing and requirement. This is no argument that proves what he intends to demonstrate in the abstract. Neither is the sending of the prophets, whom he urges toward provision, a proof that human beings are the fruit of this world. For the human being who is in truth a human being is such by the conjoining of the effusion of the two worlds: from the natural world, that which runs in the channel of the Hayula, and from the world of the Intellect, that which runs in the channel of the form. The one comes by intermediaries, and the other by intermediaries.

In the third section, the author of al-Islah said:

The Soul emanates from the First Intellect in perfection; the Hayula emanates from the Soul in perfection; and the form emanates from the Hayula in perfection. So the whole was perfect.

The author of al-Nusrah said:

If the matter is as he has said, that the perfection of the Soul is like that of the Intellect, then his statement about what is spread out upon the Hayula, the form, and the compounds is void and self-contradicting. For it is not permissible to imagine that these fashioned things come to be except from the pairing of two, one of them perfect and self-sufficient and the other deficient and in need, so that a marriage may take place between them, as is found among things witnessed, such as the heaven and the earth. The heaven is as the male: perfect and self-sufficient in all its motions, its orbits being manifest. The earth is deficient, in the rank of the female, her need for him established. For this reason a marriage took place between them, and from between them appeared the various kinds of metals, differing in their forms, and the plants, and the animals, not one of which appears actually in the heaven or in the earth or in the mothers, but which were in them in potency. When they were married, all of them appeared in actuality. Had their state not been as we have mentioned, the one deficient and the other perfect, nothing would have appeared from them. So the author of al-Nusrah said.

We say:

As for the statement of the author of al-Islah, that the Soul is the second, emanating from the First Intellect in perfection, it is correct, according to what has already been spoken above. As for his saying that the Hayula emanates from the Soul, we have already shown that its existence is not from the Soul, which is the second, but from the First Intellect. Its existence and the second are together; neither precedes the other, and neither has existence in abstraction from the other, save in the soul by way of imagination. Outside the soul they exist only together. As for the statement of the author of al-Nusrah, that it is not permissible to imagine that the fashioned things come to be except from the pairing of one perfect and self-sufficient with another deficient and in need, so that they may be coupled by what lies between them, and his likening of this to the heaven and the earth, he has refuted himself by the very words that follow. For he says that from between them appeared the various kinds of metals, differing in their forms, and the plants, and the animals, not one of which appears actually in the heaven or in the earth or in the mothers, because they were in potency. And this is to say that if any of these things, I mean the generated beings, does not appear actually in the heaven and the earth because it is in potency, then the heavens and the earth are equal in respect of their being in potency, and no superiority of one over the other appears. It is not the case that when existents come to be from between two things, one of the two must be perfect and the other deficient. We have already shown that deficiency is disclosed in things not in their selves but in their ranks, when some are added to others, and in their actions, when they do not come to be except by something other than that which completes their existence, while in their selves they are perfect. For if their selves were not perfect in the existence that befits them, no action could proceed from them, neither by themselves nor by another. The state in which the existents are found bears witness to this. The heaven, which he singled out for perfection and artistry, is deficient in its action, since its action is not completed except by that upon which it turns; and the earth, which he singled out for deficiency and need, has its deficiency not in its self but in its action, for its action is not completed except by that which turns upon it. So too with the animal and the newborn. And if this is so, then the saying of the author of al-Nusrah, that the statement of the author of al-Islah is a contradictory and prejudiced statement, is itself the contradictory and prejudiced statement.

In the fourth section, the author of al-Nusrah said:

He did not answer what was raised at the end of this section, that the name of perfection falls upon the Originator, glorified be He, because it falls upon perfect origination.

We say:

The author of al-Islah mentioned nothing of the sort. What he reported from the sages in the book of al-Islah, that they said the perfect Originator has perfect origination, and that the origination which is the perfection could be nothing but perfect, is a saying than which none could be more correct. By that saying he established that the perfect and the perfection are the origination and the originated, not the Originator, glorified be He. The name of perfection, by what he mentioned, does not fall upon the Originator, glorified be He, nor does his speech comprise anything of that. The claim of the author of al-Nusrah here is prejudice against the author of al-Islah.

In the fifth section, the author of al-Nusrah said:

We all say that origination is the cause of the originated, and that it and the originated, from the side of the originated, are one thing, and it is perfect; and that what is originated by perfect origination could be nothing but perfect. Nor are we obliged to say that the Originator, glorified be He, is perfect, or that He is a cause, or that He, glorified and exalted, and the originated are one thing.

We say:

That is a statement correct in its meaning, save that we do not say that the originated by perfect origination could be nothing but perfect because origination is the perfection. Rather we say that the originated by the origination which is the perfection could be nothing but perfect; that the originated is the origination; and that it is the cause, the effect, the perfection, and the perfect. These names follow one upon another over it according to the relations, because there is a multiplicity there in the essences, so that the meanings of these names fall upon them all, while the thing there is one. In what we have set down upon this, in this book and in others, there is sufficiency without prolonging.

In the sixth section, the author of al-Nusrah said:

If it is established that this world is the act of the Soul, and that it is withal in the utmost order and arrangement, with perpetual circling motions, then we know and are certain that in her act she sought to attain the rank withheld from her before she began to act. Since this is so, and since there was in the world nothing more honorable than the human being, nor anything more disposed to receive the effects of the Soul from her and in which her benefits are more efficacious, we know and are certain that human beings are the fruit of the Soul's attainment of the end appointed for her from the side of her cause. So understand that.

We say:

It has already gone forth from our speech, in the matter of the perfection of the second, which in his account is the Universal Soul, what indicates that in her act she did not seek to attain a rank she had not gained. The Universal Soul, which is the second, effuses upon this world not to draw to herself what is not hers, for Allah enriched her, when He brought her into being, by perfection, so that she seeks nothing that was not given her. Rather her act is to establish wisdom in the bringing forth of what is in potency into act, and to make what is base excellent, and what is later in existence to follow upon what went before. And whoever considers it well finds that the benefit returns upon that which is brought forth into act, and upon him who is under the charge of striving toward perfection, not upon her who is neither charged nor in need. To believe otherwise of that mighty hadd is error and sin. And since this is so, and since the human being has two sides, one of them natural and one of them divine, he is neither the fruit of this world purely nor the fruit of that world purely, but the fruit of both worlds together. He is the last in the beings, united with eternity by what he has acquired in time. Therefore it has been said:

> ما جرى في أولهم، جرى في آخرهم

What came to pass in the first of them came to pass in the last of them.

And whoever has known from that the stations of the prophets, the guardians, the imams, and the righteous (عليهم السلام), he is disposed for deliverance. May Allah gather us with our pure masters in the House of Holiness.

As for the seventh section, and the saying of the author of al-Nusrah that every doer does what he does only in seeking to attain what he wills, and especially when the act proceeds from the doer with motion, order, and arrangement, and his holding that this is not binding upon the First Originator and upon origination, because the act there is by way of metaphor, not with motion, nor order, nor arrangement, but rather its first is its last, and its first and its middle are the utmost of its utmost, and its utmost is its middle, there being in it no order and no arrangement; but the order and the arrangement are in that which the second gains, from the lights of Him in whom there is no arrangement and no order, and He is the First Intellect; and the Soul comes to resemble the Intellect greatly, so that when she looks into it toward Him she apprehends the powers of things that are without order and without arrangement, apprehending things rather all at once, and this belongs to her only when she is united with the Intellect and has driven back the material things of dark nature:

We say:

How can what he said be sound, when order and arrangement are found only from the Intellect? And how can it be sound, when the things taken all at once are made excellent only by the Intellect, and the Soul, in which the effects of the Intellect leave no impress, is on a level with the beasts? It is for this reason that Allah has lifted knowledge from the Soul until the time when the effects of the Intellect leave their impress upon her. We have already said above that the proposition concerning doers is not universal, so that not every doer seeks by his act to attain a want or a purpose. What I reckon he intended by that saying is that the essence of the First Intellect is not composite, so as to have arrangement and order. But as for apprehension, the Intellect apprehends only by a true apprehension.
