# What We Wear: Dress, Adornment, and Fragrance

Ja'far ibn Muhammad, (ع), said: "Dress and adorn yourselves with what is lawful, for Allah, mighty and exalted, loves beauty." It is narrated that he went out one cold day wearing a fur cloak of yellow khazz and a yellow khazz mantle. When he saw the people staring at him, he said: "There was a prophet, the son of a prophet, the son of a prophet, the son of a prophet," meaning Yusuf, (ع), "who wore robes of brocade fastened with gold and sat upon his throne to judge among the people."

Ali ibn al-Husayn, (ع), used to wear in summer two garments bought for five hundred dirhams each, and in winter he wore khazz. Ja'far ibn Muhammad, (ع), was asked about a man who acquires many garments to adorn himself, keeping some in reserve to protect the others, whether this is a kind of excess. He said: "No, that is not extravagance. Allah, mighty and exalted, says: ﴿لِيُنفِقْ ذُو سَعَةٍ مِّن سَعَتِهِ﴾ Let the one who has abundance spend out of his abundance." (Al-Talaq: 7)

Sufyan al-Thawri came in upon him and saw that he was wearing fine garments. He said: "O son of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family and grant him peace, you tell us that Ali, (ع), used to wear coarse cloth and rough fabric, yet here you are dressed in al-Quhi and al-Muwri." He answered: "Woe to you, Sufyan. Ali, (ع), lived in a time of hardship and scarcity, but Allah, mighty and exalted, has widened our means, and it is fitting for the one upon whom Allah has bestowed abundance that the trace of that bounty be seen upon him." Ali ibn al-Husayn, (ع), used to have a khazz mantle bought for him for fifty dinars, which he would wear through the winter, entering the mosque and praying in it. When summer came he would order that it be given away as charity on his behalf, and he would command that two garments of the Egyptian sort be bought for him, which would be readied and which he would wear in the summer, wearing between these the fine and the plain alike. When this was remarked upon to him, he would recite the words of Allah, mighty and exalted: ﴿قُلْ مَنْ حَرَّمَ زِينَةَ اللَّهِ الَّتِي أَخْرَجَ لِعِبَادِهِ وَالطَّيِّبَاتِ مِنَ الرِّزْقِ﴾ "Say: Who has forbidden the adornment of Allah which He has brought forth for His servants, and the good things of sustenance?" (Al-A'raf: 32)

Ali, (ع), once looked upon a people wearing wool and hair, and he said to them: "Wear cotton, for that was the clothing of the Messenger of Allah, the best thing he could find, and it is our dress. He wore neither wool nor hair, so do not wear them except out of some need, or when you can find nothing else. Allah, mighty and exalted, is beautiful and loves beauty, and He loves to see the trace of His blessing upon His servant."

It is narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad, (ع), that he performed the Hajj, entering ihram in two fine garments. While he was making tawaf in them, a man tugged at the edge of his cloak. He turned and found it was Abbad al-Basri, who said to him: "O Abu Abdullah, you wear garments such as these, in a place such as this, when you stand in relation to Ali, (ع), where you stand, and you know what his clothing was like?" He replied, (ع): "Woe to you, Abbad. Ali, (ع), lived in a time when what he wore was suited to it. If I were to wear his dress today, people would say: This man is a pretender like Abbad al-Basri." Now Abbad was known for ostentation, so he was silenced and shamed, and those around him exchanged glances at his expense.

It is also narrated from him that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, said: "Wear fine turbans, for they are the crowns of the Arabs." And it is narrated from Abu Ja'far Muhammad, (ع), that some of his companions came in upon him while he was in a richly appointed room, furnished with cushions, embroidered coverings, armrests, and bedding. Later they came in upon him again and found him in a room furnished with a reed mat. They said to him: "May we be your ransom, what is this room?" He said: "This is my room. The room you saw before is the woman's room. Let me tell you something my father told me. He said: Some people once came in upon al-Husayn, (ع), and in his dwelling were carpets, rugs, and many furnishings. They said: O son of the Messenger of Allah, we see in your house things that were not in the house of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family. He said: We marry women and give them their dowries, with which they furnish and prepare their homes."

As for clothing, then, whether fine or plain, to wear it, to spread it out, and to wrap oneself in it are all permissible, and there is nothing disliked in this. Whoever wears the plain out of humility while he could have otherwise, there is nothing against him; and whoever wears the fine, finding it within his reach and his means, that too is permissible for him, and indeed it is recommended as a showing of the grace of Allah, mighty and exalted. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, wore both the fine and the plain, whatever he wore and whatever others clothed him in.

On What Is Lawful, Forbidden, and Disliked in Clothing

It is narrated to us from the Imams, (عليهم السلام), that clothing made of whatever the earth grows, and the spreading of it, the wrapping in it, and the praying in it and upon it, are all lawful. Likewise the skin of every animal whose flesh may be eaten, and its wool, hair, and fur, are lawful and permitted, so long as the animal was slaughtered properly. As for the wool, hair, and fur of a dead animal, and its skin, to wrap oneself in it, spread it out, and use it is permitted, as we have mentioned, just as the like is permitted in what has been touched by impurities, except that one may not pray in any of it, just as one does not pray in an impure garment.

The Imams disliked for a man to wear pure silk, though they permitted what was woven together with something else grown from the earth. It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, permitted it to certain people, and allowed that one display it and adorn oneself with it before the enemy, so that they might know the strength of the Muslims, in keeping with the words of Allah, blessed and exalted: ﴿وَأَعِدُّوا لَهُم مَّا اسْتَطَعْتُم مِّن قُوَّةٍ وَمِن رِّبَاطِ الْخَيْلِ تُرْهِبُونَ بِهِ عَدُوَّ اللَّهِ﴾ "And prepare against them whatever force you are able, and steeds of war, by which you strike fear into the enemy of Allah." (Al-Anfal: 60) The Imams, (عليهم السلام), would themselves wear it in this manner, woven with other materials, and lined with what the earth grows, displaying it before the enemies of Allah, and they permitted it to whoever would so display it. Even though the world and all that is in it is among the most trifling of things in their sight, they would show of it only what they showed as a preparation for the strength of Islam and the Muslims, and a display before those who set themselves against them and made enmity with them among all people.

It is narrated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, used to love white among garments and would say: "It is the best of your clothing, so wear it, and shroud your dead in it." No dye renders a garment forbidden to wear. The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, and the Imams of his house wore dyed cloth, while preferring some dyes over others. As is narrated from Ali, (ع), that he said: "Saffron is ours, and safflower yellow is for the Banu Umayyah." And Ja'far ibn Muhammad, (ع), disliked a deep, heavily saturated red, saying: "It is the garb of Qarun and the dye of the Banu Umayyah." He used to wear safflower that was not intense. It is narrated of Ali, (ع), that he went out to the people of Kufa one day, from the palace to the open ground of al-Rahba, wearing a yellow waist-wrapper and a black khamisa, with sandals on his feet and in his hand an anaza, that is, a staff upon which he leaned.

It is narrated of Ja'far ibn Muhammad, (ع), that he entered ihram in a green cloak, and of Ali ibn al-Husayn, (عليهم السلام), that he was seen wearing a black overgarment with a blue border. Yet the Imams, (عليهم السلام), disliked black as adornment, because the Banu al-Abbas had taken it as their garb and claimed that they wore it in grief for al-Husayn ibn Ali, (ع). Had there been any merit in this, it would have been the duty of the Imams among his own descendants to be the first to it; and had they truly grieved for him as they claimed, they would not have done to his descendants what they did. So the Imams, (عليهم السلام), disliked adorning themselves in the garb of such people. They saw no harm, (عليهم السلام), in images or figures worked into garments. It is narrated from one of the companions of Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali, (ع), that he came in upon him while he was seated on a carpet bearing figures, and spoke to him about it. He said that the sunnah is that one tread upon it. And when the dislike that some people hold for living figures was mentioned before him, on the grounds that Allah, mighty and exalted, created such things, he said: "Is it not He, mighty and exalted, who created everything, the trees and the inanimate, all that is seen? Yet they portray that and see no harm in portraying it. So what is the difference between the one and the other?"

On Ornaments and What May Be Made of Them

It is narrated to us from the Imams of the house of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, all of them, that they related from him that he permitted women to adorn themselves with gold. Ja'far ibn Muhammad, (ع), was asked about this, and he said: "My father, (ع), used to adorn his children and his women with gold and silver." He said: "There is no harm in ornamenting swords and copies of the Qur'an with gold and silver." It is narrated of Ali, (ع), that he said: I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, say: "A woman should not pray except with an earring upon her or more," meaning when she is able to find such a thing. He forbade women to leave themselves bare of ornament, and to imitate men, and he cursed those among them who did so. Ja'far ibn Muhammad, (ع), said: "It is not fitting for a woman to leave herself unadorned, even if only by hanging a necklace about her neck." And the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, forbade women, when they go out, to wear ornaments that make an audible sound, in keeping with the words of Allah, mighty and exalted: ﴿وَلَا يَضْرِبْنَ بِأَرْجُلِهِنَّ لِيُعْلَمَ مَا يُخْفِينَ مِن زِينَتِهِنَّ﴾ "And let them not strike their feet so as to make known what they conceal of their adornment." (Al-Nur: 31)

It is narrated from him, (ع), that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, forbade men to set a seal-ring of gold. His own seal, may Allah bless him and his family, was of silver, its stone of silver as well, engraved with "Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah." The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, forbade the setting of rings of iron and adorning oneself with iron, saying: "It is the ornament of the people of the Fire." It is narrated from him that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, used to wear his ring on his right hand, and likewise it has come from the Imams, (عليهم السلام), that they wore their rings on their right hands and commanded their followers and adherents to do the same.

It is narrated of Ali, (ع), that he said: I heard the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, say: "Whoever sets a ring with a stone of red carnelian, Allah seals his affair with what is good." He used to recommend it, and the ruby as well, and would say: "Each time a man looks into it, light increases upon his face, and the prayer wearing it is worth seventy prayers." And he said: "How excellent a stone is crystal." The engraving of the seal of Ali, (ع), was "Ali believes in Allah." Ja'far ibn Muhammad, (ع), forbade the setting of a ring whose stone bears an engraved figure, and the engraving of his own seal was "My Lord, You are my trust, so protect me from the evil of Your creation." It is narrated of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, that he used to turn his ring so that its stone lay against the inside of his palm.

On Fragrance, Its Excellence, and Its Recommendation

It is narrated to us from the Imams of the house of the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, from Ali, (ع), that he said: "Three things were given to the prophets: fragrance, marriage, and the siwak." And the Prophet, may Allah bless him and his family, when he traveled, carried certain things with him: the flask, the shears, the kohl-vessel, the mirror, the comb, and the siwak. He said, may Allah bless him and his family: "No servant's garment is cleansed but that his faults are lessened, and his scent is not made sweet but that his understanding is increased."

Ja'far ibn Muhammad, (ع), said: "A sweet fragrance strengthens the heart and increases vigor. The fragrance of men is that whose scent is apparent and whose color is hidden, and the fragrance of women is that whose color is apparent and whose scent is concealed, except when they go out, for then it is disliked that they perfume themselves so that it can be detected from them." It is narrated of Ali, (ع), that he said: The Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, used to apply fragrance, and to apply it abundantly, until it would change the color of his hair. And he said, may Allah bless him and his family: "Whoever goes to the Friday prayer, let him apply perfume, even if only from his family's flask." It is narrated of Ali, (ع), that he would sometimes perfume himself from the fragrance of his wives, by which is meant the kind of women's fragrance whose color does not show but only its scent. As for what shows its color, such as khaluq and the like, it is disliked for men except in the company of their wives. The Imams, (عليهم السلام), disliked that one return a gift of fragrance to him who offered it, and likewise that one refuse an offering of water.

Al-Mu'izz, (ع), said: Al-Mansur, may Allah sanctify his soul, told me: One day, when I was a small boy, I was present at the table of al-Mahdi, (ع), and we were a company of his sons and his sons sons eating before him, with a serving-girl standing by with water for us. She offered it to one of the boys, who refused it, and al-Mahdi, (ع), rebuked her sharply and said: "Were it not for the sanctity of your sharing in this food, I would have disciplined you well. What moved you to offer him water when he had not asked for it?" Then he said to the boy: "And you, when it was offered to you, why did you refuse it? Water is too noble a thing to be offered to one who did not ask, or to be refused by one to whom it was offered." Al-Mansur, (ع), said: I did not understand at the time what manner of thing this was, but when I came to understand, I grasped his meaning, (ع). And so it is with fragrance as well.

From Ali, (ع), it is narrated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, used to anoint himself with musk, المسك. He held it in such regard that he directed it be placed in his embalming, his حنوط, so that its fragrance would remain with him. And something finer than it was used over him, (ع), in that embalming.

It is further narrated, on the authority of the Imams, (عليهم السلام), that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, forbade a woman to pray unless she has applied henna, الحناء, or has touched the place of the henna with something.

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali, (ع), said that a woman should therefore not leave off the dye, الخضاب, even when she has grown old, even if she does no more than wipe her hand with henna as a light anointing. And she should not make herself resemble men.

And from Ali, (ع), it is narrated that the Messenger of Allah, may Allah bless him and his family, said: "It is not for a menstruating woman to tell a story or to engrave."

And from Ali, (ع): "The Children of Israel perished through stories, engravings, henna, and excessive ornamentation."
