In the context of Tawhid Rabb al-'Alamin (the monotheism of the Lord of the worlds), I had explained to you what the Tawhid of Iman (faith) is. Tawhid is the name for Tanzi'ah (transcendence) and Tajrid (abstraction). Tawhid is to keep the Khutut 'Ali (high lines) and Khutut Dani (low lines) within their respective limits. Tanzih is to purify Him from all Sifat (attributes), and Tajrid is to deem the attribute of creating from where there was nothing as worthy only for Allah Ta'ala. To perform these three tasks is what? It is Tawhid. And what has the 'Alam-e-Islam (Islamic world) or the world done? They have accepted a Dair-e-Khuda (realm/temple of God). In this regard, I had presented before you Shirk (polytheism), Kufr (disbelief), Irtad (apostasy), and all these things. The real matter is that a materialist who keeps an eye on matter, the way he views the world, if you were to sit and examine it in that way, you would find that there are only two... there is only one ideology that leads to Allah Ta'ala. What is it? That Sabab (cause) and Musabbib (causer), Athar (effect) and Mu'aththir (effector), 'Illat (cause) and Ma'lul (effect), cause and effects, we measure the world by these. And... by this, we examine that in order to see the conditions of the world, that every thing has an effect, and it has a cause. There is an effect, and it has a Mu'aththir (effector). Or there is an 'Illat (cause), and it has a Ma'lul (effect). If there is a Ma'lul, it has an 'Illat. In this same way, if you keep examining all things... for example, you saw smoke somewhere in the distance. What did you understand? That there must be a fire there. Fire... in the same way, you saw rain, so you immediately understood its cause, that this rain came because of the clouds. And what was the cause of the clouds? They were caused by vapors. How were the vapors caused? The heat of the sun on the river caused it, and from that, the vapors rose. So in any case, from 'Illat and Ma'lul... In this way, we see that all things find their place, and we, the entire world, has understood the 'Illat, the final 'Illat, as what? And the final Mu'aththir, the one who casts the effect, they have understood that as God. And as I told you, they understood the final cause as God. In this same way, if you look at numerical numbers, one, two, three, four, five, if according to these numbers, they understood one as God. Whereas one was not God, but rather, the one who counts one... the counting that happens, the counter of the counting is one... so there was a difference between 'Aad (the counter) and 'Adad (the number). And 'Aad is the one who counts, and the one who counts is God. In this same way, in 'Illat and Ma'lul, 'Illat was God, cause was God, and the Mu'aththir, the one who casts the effect... So, what they, what the world understood was this. What was the reality? That just as you consider the counter of the counting to be God, in the same way, cause and effect and whatever else, the maker of this... the one who made it is God. So, in our Tawhid and the Tawhid of the entire world, there is such a clear difference. In our view and in the view of the entire world, such a clear difference and Imtiyaz (distinction) has arisen. Are you understanding? That they call the final... the one who creates the final cause, God. They call the final Mu'aththir God. We call the one who created that Mu'aththir God. So, in this way, a clear difference has arisen between our ideology and their ideology. And I had told you, in the context of committing Shirk, that there is a Shirk-e-Khafi (hidden polytheism) and a Shirk-e-Jali (manifest polytheism). Shirk-e-Khafi, I had told you that we, just as, are afraid of something, or we watch some spectacle and we like it a lot and we don't say Subhanallah, and we like it and... some divine things, we associate them with it. If, although in our hearts we associate something or other, then this thing that we associate, what will that be? It is Shirk-e-Khafi. And what is Shirk-e-Jali? That in a completely manifest way, just as 'Isa 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam (Jesus, peace and blessings be upon him) was considered the son of God. Or 'Uzayr (Ezra) was considered the son of God... Jali. So, to be saved from Shirk-e-Jali, Shirk-e-Khafi, all these things... So, as I have told you, Allah Ta'ala has... al-salatu wa al-salam, for this very reason, that Allah Ta'ala, who is the Creator, the creator of the cause, the creator of the Mu'aththir, the creator of the 'Illat, the one who counts, He can never be counted, He can never be enumerated. He cannot be enumerated. That is why the Prophet of the Lord of the worlds has said what? "Man 'arafa nafsahu faqad 'arafa Rabbahu" (He who knows himself knows his Lord). The one who recognized his own self, he recognized his Lord. To recognize the Lord, if you want to, then look at your own self. If you do not find your self, you will not find God. So it became known that to look at one's own self... that is why it came in the Qur'an Sharif: "Wa fi anfusikum afala tubsirun" (And in your own selves. Will you not then see?). O people, why do you not see within your own Nufus (selves), in your own beings? The way your being has come, you do not reflect upon it. And what is the reality? I will... the series is still long... and I will tell you that this Jan (life/soul), the entire world is Anjan (unaware) of it. They are unaware of the Jan itself. It is not known what the Jan is. You will say, "Such a radiant thing, a walking, moving human being"... is because of this Jan. But the reality is that they are unaware of this very Jan. They do not know what the Jan is. So this was the Lutf-o-Karam (grace and generosity) of Allah Ta'ala, this was the Ihsan (benevolence), that... Tawhid was bestowed upon us in the correct manner, and we were connected with such Awliya' Allah (friends of God), their Daman (hem of the garment) came into our hands, because of which we were able to practice the correct Tawhid. And who are the ones who taught that correct Tawhid? Mawla-na al-Mu'minin, Hazrat 'Ali ibn Abi Talib 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam (Our Master, the Commander of the Faithful, Hazrat 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, peace and blessings be upon him), who, in his explanations, made rivers flow. And in his Khutbat 'Aliyat (Sublime Sermons), he decided this and he told us clearly and manifestly... So I was telling you that in reality, this entire Khalf-e-Shar (confusion), why did it happen? As the poets say, one of our... Jigar's teacher, Asghar Gondvi, his couplet is: "Lau-e-Shama'-e-Haqiqat ki... Fanus ki gardish se kya kya nazar ata hai" (The flame of the candle of reality... what all is seen from the revolution of the lantern). So they remained in this revolution. All the people of the world remained in the revolution and they understood it within the revolution of the lantern, and they could not reach the reality. And even Allama Iqbal says... "Kabhi aye Haqiqat-e-Muntazar, nazar aa libas-e-majaz mein, ke hazaron sajde tadap rahe hain meri jabin-e-niyaz mein" (O Awaited Reality, appear sometime in the garment of metaphor, for thousands of prostrations are writhing on my forehead of supplication). So what is this Haqiqat-e-Muntazar (Awaited Reality) that was awaited? What is that Haqiqat-e-Muntazar? Iqbal, too, like all the lakhs of Muslims, like a Mard-e-Mu'min (man of faith), held this ideology that when our Intiqal (passing away) happens, we will meet with Allah Ta'ala, we will meet with the Rab (Lord), and we will... that Haqiqat-e-Muntazar... But what are our distances? Now you will understand all those things and the realities will come before you, and you will find out how far this philosophy is. That Iqbal is not seeing from so close. Only one thing about him is that he was indeed a Falsuf (philosopher), a great Hakim (wise man), and he said some couplets in a strange manner. And especially, Iqbal's philosophy of Khudi (the self), as I told you, that our individuality, that... if you want to prove and state the Infaradiyyat (individuality) of God, and He is a unique being, Ahadiyyat (oneness), then He was Ahad (the One), He was Ekta (one), He created Ekta in us too, and what will be the thing that shows this Ekta? It is Khudi. So this was the philosophy that Iqbal presented. In any case, the world remained in this confusion and could never get out of it. From here, about the Dhat-e-Ahadiyyat (Essence of Oneness), various thoughts arose, various matters arose, and because of these chaotic conditions, and because of not having the correct Idrak (perception) of Dhat-e-Ahadiyyat, and because of not being Halqa-ba-gosh (subservient) to Islam, what happened? They made such an उलट-फेर (topsy-turvy mess) in this matter that they became atheists. They went towards atheism and became Mulhid (heretics) against God, they began to do Inkar (denial) of God. They said that Maddiyat (materialism) is everything, this matter is everything. So, I am telling you how the world is being corrupted, and we are becoming the cause, Muslims are becoming the cause of its corruption. They did not guide correctly. And they did not tell them in the right way. Otherwise, if they had been told in the right way and guided in the right way... they did not want to see, nor did they want to tell, whatever you may think. In any case, they were to remain astray, and astray they became. So I was saying that to know the reality of that Lord of the worlds is among the impossibilities. And it is such a thing about which the Prophet, 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, has clearly stated: "Idha balaghtum ila Allah, fa-skutu" (When you reach [in thought] to Allah, then be silent). When you reach Allah, thinking, then be silent, be careful. You are not to walk here, O Salik (traveler), O one who walks, stop. Now your step will not move forward, and you become silent. For the Dhat-e-Ahadiyyat, you just acknowledge this much, that He is... he taught to call upon Him, he taught us to understand, in what manner we should call upon Him, in what way we should call upon Him, what was taught? "Shahid Allahu annahu la ilaha illa hu" (Allah bears witness that there is no god but Him). Allah has given witness that there is no Ma'bud (one to be worshipped) but... Remember this. Never forget this verse, that "Shahid Allahu annahu la ilaha illa hu." I told you that generally the meaning that is given to this, the meaning that is given, what meaning is given? That Allah has... Waraq (paper/leaf) except Allah. And this statement cannot be correct. For this reason, that Allah Himself should give His own testimony... अरे (hey), a testimony is one that someone else gives. Should one give one's own testimony for oneself? You will say, "It was the Dhat-e-Ahadiyyat, it was the being of Allah Ta'ala, and it was the matter of that Lord of the worlds"... But despite that, the matter does not settle. So the one who gives the testimony, among the beings created by him, the highest being is the one who gave the testimony and said that there is no Ma'bud... And how did he give the testimony? He said "Hu" (He). So just as he said "Hu," we also have to say "Hu," we also have to point with just "Hu," which our... what name did he use to refer to it? Mubdi'. He referred to it by the name Mubdi' or Ghayb al-Ghuyub (the Unseen of the Unseen). He gave them two words, to them... to us, for understanding. It is not its name. What are its names? Those are the ninety-nine names, the ninety-nine names that have come in the Qur'an Sharif. And from those same attributes... In reality, what happens from a name? As I have explained, it is that by which a thing is recognized. The manifestation of God are those ninety-nine people who, in reality, are His created beings. They have become Raziq (the Provider), they have become Qadir (the Powerful), they have become 'Alim (the Knower), whom we call 'Alim-e-Mutlaq (the Absolute Knower). Otherwise, what will happen? It will become Shirk. If we consider that Lord of the worlds to be 'Alim-e-Mutlaq, then we too are a little knowledgeable, even if it is 1% so. But we are. We are also knowledgeable and He is also knowledgeable. For this very reason, look, the knower of the unseen... "Ma ya'lamu"... Allah Ta'ala who is... in the Qur'an Sharif it is clearly stated that no one is a knower of the unseen except Allah. Right? No one is a knower of the unseen except Allah. When no one is a knower of the unseen except Allah, then why did Allah Ta'ala say this, "Wa al-rasikhuna fi al-'ilm" (And those firm in knowledge). And those people know who are firm in knowledge. So it is known that there are some people of Allah who are indeed knowers of the unseen. So when they are knowers of the unseen, then it is obvious that this statement which is generally made is not correct. The knowers of the unseen are intermediary beings. They are Wasita (intermediaries). And the details of those Wasita will come before you. And I will tell you how those Wasita are, how the knowers of the unseen are, how they are Wasila (means), how the Ahl al-Bayt are... But I am telling you this, that the Lord of the worlds, from His grace, from His generosity, from His munificence, did this, that the need was that His... Now you will say, "Was he in need of servitude?" From our perspective. Meaning, it was such a necessary thing that His servitude should happen. That is why it came in the Qur'an Majid that... "Ma khalaktu al-jinna wa al-insa illa li-ya'budun" (And I did not create the jinn and mankind except to worship Me). We have not created the jinn and the ins (humans) except for His 'Ibadat (worship). So it is known that His 'Ibadat is the Ghayat (ultimate purpose), it is the essential thing, and it is the intended Maqsad (objective). So this thing, you should tie it in a knot, that the purpose for which the Lord of the worlds has created is His 'Ibadat. So for His 'Ibadat, for His 'Ibadat, what did He do? He created everyone, the jinn and the ins, everyone. Now, if you consider that all the Muslims of the world... this Qur'an... those who believe in the Qur'an, who interpret this to mean that He did not create the jinn and ins except that... Allah Ta'ala, for His own 'Ibadat. Now, before them, I will present one verse, and they should explain its meaning. That verse is, "Ma tara fi khalqi al-Rahmani min tafawut" (You do not see in the creation of the Most Merciful any inconsistency). Is there anyone who will translate this? "Ma tara fi khalqi al-Rahmani min tafawut." Allah Ta'ala says, "O... O Prophet," or it is an address to all Muslims, "O people of faith..." He has already said that the jinn and the ins are for His 'Ibadat. He has said this first. And after that, he says, "Wa ma tara fi khalqi al-Rahmani min tafawut." That in the creation of the jinn and the ins, O people, you will not see any Tafawut (discrepancy). And the situation is that jinn are hidden and ins are manifest. The Qur'an came upon humans, prophets came, the book came, everything came. And for the jinnat, we don't even know what came. The Surah Jinn, however, is present in the Qur'an Sharif. Is it? Do you people meet with the jinn? You will say... to meet with humans is a blessing. A person meets another person, but the heart rarely meets with anyone. So here itself... so what will we do by meeting the jinn there? What kind of love is going to increase? But you see this, that when this Tafawut... Allah Ta'ala says that there is no Tafawut. So it is a challenge to all of Islam. Just bring it... the meaning of this verse. আরে (Hey), we see Tafawut. An extreme amount of Tafawut. Someone is up, someone is down, someone is small, someone is big, someone is tall, someone is fat, someone is thin, someone is black, someone is yellow, someone is white, someone is... someone is in a state of cold, someone in a state of heat, someone has some condition, someone has another condition... अरे (hey), there are thousands of Tafawut. There are thousands of Tafawut. In the children of one set of parents, there is Tafawut among the children. There is Tafawut among all the children who are born. In twins... Now what more can you take than this? So the creation that has been born, the Makhluk (created beings) that are there, Allah Ta'ala says you will not see any Tafawut in the Khilqat (creation). This is Allah's claim. And the claim we are seeing, what are we seeing? Are you all understanding? Are you getting it? That he will not see any Tafawut. And the Tafawut is that someone is thin, someone is fat, someone is wealthy, someone is a pauper. Look at the condition of some, they don't have enough to eat. Look at the condition of others, it is so abundant that it is beyond description, that he doesn't even have time to count it... Look at the condition of the Agha Khan. A lot... there are many in the world. Look at the condition of the Amir of Kuwait. So it is known that the Tafawut is immense. And there is so much Tafawut that it is beyond description. And this is Allah Ta'ala's claim. So how can this claim be true? Are you understanding? So the claimant is Allah Ta'ala and the verse is revealed in the Qur'an. "Ma tara fi khalqi al-Rahmani min tafawut." That you will not see any Tafawut in the creation. And we are seeing that there is immense Tafawut, a great deal. And there is so much Tafawut that it is endless. So then how is this? It should also be that our... and Allah's word will remain foremost. Why would it not? Because Allah Ta'ala is saying it. And how can it be wrong? "Sadaqa al-Sadiqin" (The truthful have spoken the truth), "Sadaqa al-Qa'ilin" (The speakers have spoken the truth). How can it be wrong? What was it? That Khilqat (creation) is the one which He created... that is a Ruhani Khilqat (spiritual creation), which I am beginning to mention. In that Ruhani Khilqat, you will not see any Tafawut. That Lord of the worlds created from where there was nothing. From a non-existent non-being. Meaning, if you describe even nothingness, that there is something in its result which is... a non-existent being, and it is not existent. From a non-existent being, Allah Ta'ala created. How many did He create? Two, four, eight, ten, a thousand, twelve... how many? Countless, innumerable. He created innumerably, with abundance. How did He create? He created Ashbah (forms), He created Qudsani (holy ones), He created 'Aql (intellect), He created Nafsani (souls). He created countless ones. You cannot count even its thousandth or lakhth part. আরে (hey), counting the hairs on the head, even for that... for those ancient jungle dwellers, it would have been a difficult matter. Today you can define an area and count the hairs. So can you... an हिस्सा (part) and count it? This is Allah Ta'ala's claim. For this, what claim is He making? And he is stating this very thing: "Wa ma ya'lamu junuda Rabbika illa hu" (And none knows the soldiers of your Lord except Him). Allah's army... this... who is this army? We ask the Muslims. The Muslims give this very answer, that... these are the Muslims. They are Allah's army. We have become Allah's army. Neither a sword in hand, nor a pistol with us, and ready to fight, and "junud" (soldiers). Allah Ta'ala says they are an army. And this is the state of the army. And its census does not happen? Hey, every country has its count, its census is done. So it is known that that 'Alam-e-Ruhani (spiritual world), that 'Alam-e-Qudsani (holy world), which were Nufus (souls), Ashbah (forms), were spirits... understand this, all this is for understanding. I am telling you, otherwise the words... spirit doesn't fit correctly. Understand Ashbah. Understand shadow. Understand Nafs (self/soul). Understand 'Aql (intellect). That is why they say in the Du'a for it, "'Aqlan kullun, Basaran kullun." That they, from head to... just as we are sitting with a body, if you did not have an eye, would you see? I put my hand over your eye... for a long time your eye has done the work of seeing. Now you give the command, you are the king of this kingdom of the body, you just give the command to your hands to see a little. Will your hands see? They cannot see. Those who were there were made entirely of eye. They were made entirely of nose. They were made entirely of hands, senses. They were made entirely of 'Aql. Such Ashbah were created, in which there was not even a... that there should be a difference of 19-20, it is not so. They were all identical. They had one quality, one nature, one essence, one... of one kind. They were 'Aql, they were Nafs, they were Shibh (likeness), they were Qudsani, they were Ruhani. They were Zat (essence). And the Zawat (essences) were separate. How many were there? ... there were no groups, no tribes, they had no community, no name. They were created countless. It is not that one group was created at one time, and after that Allah Ta'ala... If He had created again, He would not remain God. Now you will say... this is a long discussion. If He had created again, He would not remain God. For this reason, that... na'udhu billah (we seek refuge in Allah), God would become a tyrant. You created them first, and those who came later say, "O Allah, how did you create these first, and why did you create us later? You are a tyrant." Na'udhu billah. So just as today the Muslims... that regarding Hazrat Adam, Allah Ta'ala says, "La taqraba..." addressing Janab Adam and Hawwa (Eve), "La taqraba hadhihi al-shajarah... min al-qawm al-zalimin" (Do not approach this tree... lest you be among the wrongdoing people). If... O Adam and Hawwa, near this tree... they say it was a wheat plant... and do not go near this plant, otherwise if you eat it, what will happen? You will be among the Zalimin (wrongdoers). And wow, what a marvel, that Adam and Hawwa... Hawwa made a mistake, Adam ate a little, and after eating, what happened? Their Saw'ah (shame) was exposed, the clothes of paradise were snatched away, Adam was expelled from paradise, he became Randa-e-Dargah (expelled from the court), and what happened? They were declared among the Zalimin by the word of God. And is it incumbent upon us to follow a Zalim (wrongdoer)? Will Allah Ta'ala make us do Ittiba' (following) of such a prophet? And we, in the month of Ramadan, will read, "Allahumma salli 'ala Abina Adam" (O Allah, send blessings upon our father Adam). O Allah, send blessings upon our father Adam. Will you say this? Our father Adam... send blessings upon him? Na'udhu billah, na'udhu billah. How will you say this? But they were declared Zalim. So just as they, being Zalim, in your view, but they are not Zalim, I will prove it. They are not Zalim. In the same way, now you see that that Lord of the worlds, who is untouched, who is the Mubdi' Ta'ala (Exalted Originator), who is Ghayb al-Ghuyub (the Unseen of the Unseen), who has been referred to by "Huwiyyat" (He-ness), "Shahid Allahu annahu la ilaha illa hu," has been referred to by "Hu" (He), how did He create? He created everyone with an "Yaksaniyyat" (uniformity). Now, this Yaksaniyyat, what thing was it based on? And what thing did this Yaksaniyyat possess? In them, Allah Ta'ala had placed three things. He had bestowed three matters upon them, He had given them three Jawhar (substances). What is Jawhar? First, tell me this. Jawhar and 'Arad (substance and accident). A substance is Qa'im bi-dhat (self-subsistent). And 'Arad is not Qa'im bi-dhat. Jawhar has its own essential quality. And 'Arad has an Izafi (additional) quality. These three Jawhar were given, and what were they? The first Jawhar was named 'Ilm (knowledge). The second Jawhar's name was Qudrat (power). And the third Jawhar's name was Hayat (life). 'Ilm, Qudrat, and Hayat. What is the meaning of 'Ilm? What is the meaning of 'Ilm? To know. To know. What is the meaning of Qudrat? To have power over something. And what is the meaning of Hayat? Life. This life? And this 'Ilm that we know? We have read and we understand. Let me explain a bit. What is 'Ilm, what is Qudrat, and what is Hayat? First of all, the most beautiful thing... I have told you before that in the world too, there are two ideologies, 'Adam (non-existence) and Wujud (existence). 'Adam... Wujud has importance over 'Adam. And then there are two types of Wujud: Hassas (sentient) and Ghayr-Hassas (non-sentient). Nami (growing) and Ghayr-Nami (non-growing). Nami has precedence over Ghayr-Nami. There are two types of Nami, and they are Jamid (inanimate) and Ghayr-Jamid (animate). And its two types are Hassas and Ghayr-Hassas. And its two types are 'Aqil (rational) and Ghayr-'Aqil (irrational). Then there are two types of 'Aqil: 'Alim (knowing) and Ghayr-'Alim (non-knowing). So in this way, the world has also arrived at this ideology that the most excellent... the best attribute in the world is what? It is 'Ilm. There is no thing greater than 'Ilm. That is why Mawla-e-Ka'inat said, "Lana 'ilmun wa li-l-a'dai malun." That for us is 'Ilm... "Wa taj-jabaru fina." He says, "Radina qismat al-jabbari fina, lana 'ilmun wa li-l-a'dai malun." We are pleased with the division of the All-Compelling among us; for us is 'Ilm and for our enemies is wealth. So He gave us 'Ilm and He gave wealth to our enemies. So this is the virtue of 'Ilm. And the virtue of 'Ilm, where did Allah Ta'ala establish it? Where did He lay its foundation? Where did He place its basis? There. The first thing He bestowed upon them was 'Ilm. Now what is this 'Ilm? Let's understand 'Ilm. 'Ilm is that which is called "Ma kana sa yakun" (what was and what will be). Look. Mazi (past), Hal (present), Mustaqbil (future). What you are calling Hal, in one second it becomes Mazi. This is what happens. What you call the present, it ends in a second and becomes Mazi. So in reality, what is there? Mazi and Mustaqbil. You are understanding your Hal as such, but it is Mazi and Mustaqbil. That the scholars of the religion say that "Ma kana sa yakun," what was and what will be, all of its 'Ilm was given to them. It was bestowed. The second thing that was bestowed upon them... I will explain it further, but for now, just understand this, "Ma kana sa yakun," what was and what will be, this thing was given to them. Second, Qudrat (power). Qudrat means to be Qadir (powerful) over something. What is your Qudrat? I said, "Just pick up this stool and bring it." You immediately brought it. I said, "Just bring the television." You looked at another person. Why? Why did you look? I... "No sir, it's heavy. I can't lift it alone, someone else will have to help." I will tell you, "Just lift this almirah." You will say, "What are you saying? You're telling me to lift the almirah? For that, we'll have to call a laborer." So you know that you have power. Your power is limited. Where your power gives out, there you are limited. You did not remain Qadir. So it is known that you are Qadir... to a certain extent you have power, and after that your power ends. But this power had made them Qadir in such a way that the word "no" would not even arise there. To have power over everything. Whatever one wants, whenever one wants, however one wants, to have that power. This is the power that Allah Ta'ala had bestowed upon them. These are two things. And what was the third thing he bestowed? Hayat (life). What is Hayat? Life. This is our life? La hawla wa la quwwata illa billah (There is no power and no strength except with Allah). This is our life? আরে (hey), this is a life full of calamities and troubles. You ask, and you will find out what kind of a life this is. He is passing it laughing and smiling, but his heart knows... "Sir, please don't... just let it be." "Why, what's wrong?" "No, what bad can I say about Allah... just as He keeps me..." Bank balance is high. Bank balance is done, buildings are ready, alhamdulillah, there is an abundance of cars, a line of them. Now what is there? And everything is there, Allah has made everything present, but your desires... well, that's another matter. When the topic of desires comes up, I will explain it in great detail... they can live in comfort and style. And I want to prove today that wealth and health also give up in front of one thing. What... yes, this thing that has been said, that man is mortal, and when death is to come, it is not known. So you see what the state of his face becomes. And if someone is told that you are going to depart, what will be his state today? The whole night will be spent in Tahajjud prayer. The whole night he will spend in 'ibadat (worship). Why wouldn't he? It's obvious that for meeting Allah... he couldn't do anything, so at least for one night he should do something for his hereafter. And you see how... these are my tried and tested prescriptions, and what can I say to you, but this is the reality. That in the police station in Hyderabad... that the people who were giving Nazr-o-Muqam (offerings), by God, they were in the lakhs. Baba Hazrat was present. They were in the lakhs, that they were... not just... keys were coming. "These are the keys to the treasury." "Hey, what for?" "Hazrat, now there's no guarantee of staying alive." "These are our keys." "Hey, why are you giving them to us? Will you make us the trustees after you die? Everyone is going to die." "No, no, you take the keys." Why? "Now you can collect it in Zakat." Take it. अरे (hey), brother, we kept advising you, we kept saying on the land of Salwa to give Zakat, give Zakat. "No," but now he is thinking how much money will be left, the bank balance will decrease, what will happen. But today, how is it... how has this world turned upside down, that he is ready to give Zakat, he is ready to give everything. Even those who don't fast, fast. Even those who don't make vows, make vows. It is famous, the story of the Bedouin. He had climbed a tree, and when he was about to fall from the tree, from above... what would he have? A camel. He said, "I will sacrifice a camel, I will do Nahr (slaughter), O Lord, let me land safely from here." Now, when he came down a little, he tied a cow. And from there he came down, a goat. And from the goat he came down, a hen. And from the hen he came down, he just killed a mosquito and said, "Accept this." So this is the thing, that when one falls into trouble, God is remembered. When one gets out of trouble, then where is God, where is the matter... everything is gone with the wind. So here too, this is the situation. But is this life of ours, a life... this life which is full of troubles and calamities, is this life of any use? You ask... you ask, then you will know. It's not a life. You know, he's laughing, but his heart knows his condition. Sir, please. Don't... what can I say? The way he keeps me, I am happy. The bank balance is huge. The bank balance is done. Buildings are ready, alhamdulillah. There is an abundance of cars, a line of them. Now what is there? And everything is there. Allah has provided everything. But your desires... well, that's another matter. When the topic of desires comes up, I'll explain it in great detail. He can live in comfort and style. And I want to prove today that wealth and health also give up in front of one thing. Yes, this thing that is said, that man is mortal, and it is not known when death will come. You see what the state of his face becomes. And if someone is told that you are going to depart tomorrow, what will be his state today? The whole night will be spent in Tahajjud prayer. The whole night he will spend in worship. Why not? Obviously, to meet Allah... he couldn't do anything, so at least for one night he should do something for his hereafter. And you see how... these are my tried and tested prescriptions, and what can I say to you, but this is the reality. That in the police station in Hyderabad... that the people who were giving Nazr-o-Muqam, by God, they were in the lakhs. Baba Hazrat was present. They were in the lakhs, that they were... not just... keys were coming. "These are the keys to the treasury." "Hey, what for?" "Hazrat, now there's no guarantee of staying alive." "These are our keys." "Hey, why are you giving them to us? Will you make us the trustees after you die? Everyone is going to die." "No, no, you take the keys." Why? "Now you can collect it in Zakat." Take it. Hey, brother, we kept advising you, we kept saying on the land of Salwa to give Zakat, give Zakat. "No," but now he is thinking how much money will be left, the bank balance will decrease, what will happen. But today, how is it... how has this world turned upside down, that he is ready to give Zakat, he is ready to give everything. Even those who don't fast, fast. Even those who don't make vows, make vows. It is famous, the story of the Bedouin. He had climbed a tree, and when he was about to fall from the tree, from above... what would he have? A camel. He said, "I will sacrifice a camel, I will do Nahr, O Lord, let me land safely from here." Now, when he came down a little, he tied a cow. And from there he came down, a goat. And from the goat he came down, a hen. And from the hen he came down, he just killed a mosquito and said, "Accept this." So this is the thing, that when one falls into trouble, God is remembered. When one gets out of trouble, then where is God, where is the matter... everything is gone with the wind. So here too, this is the situation. But is this life of ours, a life... this life which is full of troubles and calamities, is this life of any use? There is no release. So then, what is the use of such a life, in which there is illness, there is torment, and the biggest thing, what is that thing? Accidents. There you go. Accidents. When it will collide with a motorcycle is not known. There you go. You have this fear. "Just write a Du'a." "Give me an amulet." "Why, what's wrong?" "I have a... No sir, what can I say... reading the newspaper daily, my breath gets caught, and such a terror has set in that it's difficult to go out." So it is known that they are afraid of accidents. And where will accidents not happen? They will happen above, below, in water, on land, everywhere they will happen. But what can be done? Still, what is it? You want to live in peace. You want a life of peace. It is the grace of God that He lets you sleep peacefully anyway, despite you having so many worries. Every person has worries. But despite that, they sleep peacefully. So it is known that this life is of no use. Leave everything aside, take this one thing, that this... when it will come is not known. It comes in four years, eight years, ten years. So far, I have reached this age, but after reaching it, I am counting. 50 years have passed, half a century is over, now God knows when it will come. So, a life where death is lying in wait, what is the use of this? What, does the deer leap with joy, does it prance in the jungle, when the hunter is behind it? The one behind whom death is, that life is of no use. This life. That is why neither this home is of any use, nor is this life of any use, nor is there anything here to set one's heart on. That is why Allah said what? "Dar al-Sakhat Allah" (The Abode of God's Wrath). This is the home of God's anger. This is a bad home. This is not a good home. So I will tell you, when the time comes, that this is God's... In a Qayd-khana (prison), you will say that "I will live in complete comfort and peace." So these are... these are the troubles, these are the worries. So you can never live like that. When it is called a Qayd-khana, then the Lawazim (accompaniments) of a Qayd-khana will also be there. So it is known that this life is of no use. The life should be one that is eternal. Now you will say, "Sir, it should be eternal, but..." a woman came to the Prophet 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam and said... that after dying, you have faith, you have accepted Islam, after I die, will I go to heaven or not? He said, "Of course, you have brought faith, Allah Ta'ala will admit you to heaven." So she said, "O Messenger of Allah, my purpose was not this, but I have some other purpose." He said, "Speak up, why don't you say it?" So she bowed her head and said, "O Messenger of Allah, I am afraid that will I go in such an old state?" Such fruits that I have heard of, such... such fruits, whichever fruit you take is delicious, whichever flavor you desire, you will get that flavor. And such houris and ghilman, and such sitting... the rivers there, of that paradise, and I will go there as such an old woman, with no teeth in my mouth, no... in my stomach... what will I be? So what did the Prophet say? "You, old woman, do not worry, when you go, you will go having become young." "Oh, Messenger of Allah, you have spoken... now I am relieved." So it is known that the Prophet... so this was a sign that if we get the world, and there too we get... and the life that we get is as old people, what is the use of that? We get it as children, what is the use of that? Everyone just pats us on the head, calling us innocent. "Oh, the poor thing is innocent, let him go." "Why, he is innocent..." "He doesn't need to be punished, he is innocent..." "He is such and such a thing." Neither reward nor punishment, nothing at all. He is exempt from everything. So it is known that he is not even counted. When he grew up, then this news... "Oh, leave him, he is helpless." "Why is he helpless?" "No, he is helpless, let him go." They are not of any use. So the Europeans have established the Bait-ul-Ma'zurin (home for the helpless). It's a good thing that we live with our old people. There, they live in the Bait-ul-Ma'zurin. So this is the situation. So what did God do? He created them in the most excellent state. That most excellent state is that day of youth, that hour, that moment, that second, which was the best of your life. In that state, in the most excellent of states... they are created in the most excellent of states. So you understood that Allah Ta'ala created us in the most excellent of states. And eternal life, Khalidin... if it is said that you will be given a life of 200 years, 300 years... we will repeat the era of Hazrat Musa and give it to you. He will join his hands and say, "Sir, if you give me 100 years, that is enough. I have completed a century, I will go. At most... because one has to live in Kuwait. 50 years and they will go. Now if it is Kuwait, then 100 years. And if it is Europe, then 200 years. It is acceptable." So this is the state we are in, this is how we want it. But you see that our conditions, our states, how they change. So the Lord of the worlds, the life He gave us there was eternal. Khalidin, as the Qur'an Majid calls it. Always... So now you should not worry too much about what is to come, don't ponder over the things that are to come, for this reason, that you will get into more difficulties. So for now, understand this much, that from Khalidin... a life of always, always living was given. Good. Qudrat... Qudrat-e-Tammah (complete power) was given. What is Tammah? Full power, full Qudrat. Meaning, in anything... one should not have to wield this weapon that "I cannot do this." The word "impossible" should not arise. Not impossible, everything is possible. And the third thing, what was it? 'Ilm (knowledge). 'Ilm-e-ma-kana-wa-sa-yakun. What was and what will be. All these things, He had bestowed upon them. Allah Ta'ala had bestowed them, had blessed them. If He had not created with these three things, then... Allah creates, so He should create with ornaments. So the ornament of man was what? It was this. 'Ilm, Qudrat, and Hayat. He was created rich with these. He was created having been given 'Ilm, Qudrat, and Hayat. Now, in that joy and fragrance of the Lord... and he is rich with all these three things. And no thing is more or less than another. Not even a moment, not even a moment ahead or behind, not a second ahead or behind, not even a particle's worth of more or less. If there was more or less, it would be of no use. Even Allah Ta'ala would be of no use... he becomes a tyrant. So it is known that he was created having been given 'Ilm, Qudrat, and Hayat. But these three things that were given, Allah Ta'ala, you will think, "Is it just like you practice here, that you get power... you were children, you couldn't hit. When you were children, you used to say, 'Okay, okay, you are hitting now, I will see you when I grow up. When I grow up, I will show you.'" Now you have grown up, you have learned to use your hands. So here what happens... so will it be the same situation there? No. 'Ilm, Qudrat, and Hayat were given, but they were given in a passive state. Not in an active state. Did you understand? They were given Bi-l-quwwah (in potentiality), not Bi-l-fi'l (in actuality). Not active. Meaning, Allah Ta'ala had indeed bestowed them, He had given them, just as He has given everything in a seed. He has given all the abilities to a human child, that he can become whatever... become Archimedes, or become Shakespeare, whatever he wants, he can. But he has to develop the abilities. He can become a poet, a dramatist, anything he can become. But he has all the abilities. And if he doesn't use these abilities, what will he become? He will remain a simpleton. Or he will become the gardener of a garden. Or he will become a servant who works. He is a human being just like you. Look at the one who works. You are educated, that is why you should thank Allah for this blessing, that you have become capable of something. And he could not become capable. So it is known that Allah Ta'ala had given abilities to everyone. He had created every child with abilities, just as Allah Ta'ala has... in every seed... has the ability to become a tree. And when it... but what should be done with that tree? That seed, you have to sow it. First, you have to level the ground, you have to put it under the cover of soil, and then you have to water it, and then you have to wait for some time, you have to take the season into account, then it will become a tree. And you are... the tree will be, when it will be, then the fruits will come, everything will happen. The time will come. So just as a seed has all the abilities to sprout, to grow, and to bear fruit... just as there is ability, everything is there to become. In the same way, the ability was given there, of 'Ilm, Qudrat, and Hayat. Allah Ta'ala had bestowed 'Ilm, had bestowed Qudrat, and had bestowed Hayat. And had given it completely. To make it eternal was in their hands. To obtain 'Ilm-e-ma-kana-wa-sa-yakun was their job. And to obtain Qudrat-e-Tammah was their job. But the work that had to be done, what was that work? That work was just this, "...illa li-ya'budun," that we have not created man and jinn except for His... His 'ibadat (worship). 'Ibadat... now you will say, "Where were the hands and feet? Where was the prayer mat? And where was the direction? Where was the Ka'bah? And where was the prayer hall to be offered?" 'Ibadat does not mean this. The soul of 'ibadat, the soul of all 'ibadat is Tawhid Rabb al-'Alamin (the monotheism of the Lord of the worlds). To consider Allah Ta'ala as one... how much time would it take for the creator to create them? And were the created ones so unworthy, na'udhu billah, that they would not do it? The 'ibadat of Allah. But this is what happened. That they did not... what's the use of saying it. That those innumerable beings, those countless people, those innumerable created ones, created in one state, in one quality, of one kind of attributes, not having any kind of difference among themselves, what did they do? The work that they were supposed to do, they did not do. So you will say, "How did you know this?" It is known. When... when 'Ilm comes, when the Qur'an Majid comes to you, when it has come, it has come. Now you are finding out that that Lord of the worlds wanted this, and His purpose and goal was this, that the created ones should say that the creator is, we are the created ones, and He is one being... just to say this much... rather, to say that He is one being, this would encompass everything. This sentence would include everything. That Lord of the worlds is our provider, the creator, He is one being... they should say this. But unfortunately, no one did it. Now you will say, "Why didn't they do it?" Here, look. Understand this in contrast. You won't be able to recognize the color black until there is the color white in the background. You won't recognize white until... so here what happens? "Why didn't you understand, sir?" "I had come, I was in the lesson, I was sitting in the front, but what can I do? I had a headache, so what could I do, sir? It was very difficult. I had a headache, I was listening, I was trying to understand, but I couldn't understand anything." "Why didn't you understand, sir?" "A mountain was sitting in front of me. I couldn't even see you." You... you are unlettered, so what can I understand? You are explaining the geography of the world, I am unlettered in geography. I am unlettered in such and such a thing, I am unlettered in science, I am unlettered in such and such a thing. There you go, all the complaints and grievances started, "For this reason I didn't understand," because of some laziness, because of some obstacle, because of being ahead or behind. So there, was there anyone ahead or behind? Was there any hall there, where some were sitting in the front and some in the back? That the lecture was being delivered on a loudspeaker? No. Neither were they ahead, nor behind, nor above, nor below. Neither were they lazy, nor clever. Neither was there good there, nor bad. They were all in one group, in one state. In one state, in one condition. To understand this one state, you can look at anything. Just as there are herds of something, just as there are clusters, in that, just as they are all uniform, of one kind, it was the same kind of uniformity. Here it is a bit difficult to find an example. But still, you understand that they were all together. So if they were together, then they should have understood. Why shouldn't they have understood? Then why did it happen that not even one... one should have stood up. Yes. Indeed. It is obvious that the purpose and goal of the Lord of the worlds was that they should stand up and say... they should go from passive to active, from Bi-l-quwwah to Bi-l-fi'l. And they should understand something, comprehend. So it is obvious that when there is understanding and comprehension, this word is there, so there is also one who understands and comprehends. And there is also one who becomes active. There is also one who becomes Bi-l-fi'l. And who is he? There was only one being. Now you will say, "Was there a label on him? Was there a lock on him?" Nothing at all. Neither a sign, nor a mark, nothing. He was from among us. अरे (hey), he was our companion. He was just like us. There was no difference. There was not even a particle's worth of difference. Between us and him, there was not even a particle's worth of difference. He also had that same 'Ilm-e-ma-kana-wa-sa-yakun given to him, we also had those things, he also had... the life that was given... Qudrat-e-Tammah was bestowed. And they were in one state, one quality, one nature, created in one form. There was no difference. But he thought. And what did he do? That one form, that one 'Aql... that is why 'Aql is called... 'Aql is called tying. 'Aqala is called tying the feet of a she-camel. What is the job of 'Aql? The job of an intelligent person is to tie the feet of the she-camel and then protect it. You don't tie it and you protect it. What does that mean? How will it be protected? First you close the door of the house, then you protect it. You put the thing in the treasury, you lock it, then you protect it. You say, "I will carry all the things in my hand, and then Allah Ta'ala will protect it." Or he will protect it in such a way as the Bedouin protected it. He buried his treasure and put a cloud as a marker. Is that how it is protected? Does the marker of a cloud remain? The cloud moved on. So in the same way, there, by the grace of that Lord of the worlds, just one being... now you will say, "Did Allah have a lot of mercy on him? Was He looking at him with a lot of love? Did He have a special eye on him, Allah?" No. He had the same eye on everyone. Not a particle's worth of... I will explain this further. But for now, just understand this, that one single individual, one form, one 'Aql, one of the same qualities and being, this 'Ilm, Qudrat, and Hayat possessing, this three-in-one, this knot had been tied, of Qudrat, 'Ilm, and Hayat. This, possessing all three things, one of them, one being out of innumerable and countless people... they were individuals, and how were they created? In an 'Alifi state. Just as the Alif stands, in a straight state, in the form of a human being. In this quality, they were created. These were all Shibh (likenesses), and the one who created them all had created them. And out of them, one single individual, one form, thought about this, that what is... have I created myself? Look at the thought. Have I created myself? He pondered. "No, I don't have that much power to create myself." Look, this is the first matter. Then he pondered, "Have these people around me, these innumerable ones, have they created me?" The answer came, "No." Then he pondered, "Have I created them?" He said, "I can't even create myself, so how can I create them?" Immediately this thought came. The third thought that came was that there is a creator of all of us, of me and of all these. As soon as this thought came, he became Azali (pre-eternal), he became Abadi (post-eternal), he became 'Aad (the counter), the one who counts, he became the final cause, he became the Mu'aththir, he became the 'Illat of the Ma'lul, and he became one. The one being is his. And this is called Mubda'. Mubda' is called that being who creates from where there was nothing, the creator. And Mubda' is the one who has been created. Now you will say, "Why, sir? You come to class, 'All are unworthy children, they don't do anything, they don't study. Just this one, whom I have appointed as the monitor, he studies. He is my... bet, and he is my choice.'" That's it. In the same way, because he had spread his prayer mat on that expanse of light, he had done 'ibadat, he had done the ultimate 'ibadat, and the correct 'ibadat, Tawhid Rabb al-'Alamin, he had done. So... now you will say, "How did this one think of it? Why not, sir? So many innumerable beings. আরে (hey), ten, five shouldn't have... আরে (hey), if not thousands, then let's say a hundred. If not a hundred, then at least fifty. If not fifty, then at least five. Five should have come out. Why did one come out?" This has to be explained. Why did one come out? For example, you should conceive of freedom. Freedom... conceive it. It's a bit difficult. Conceiving of freedom is not easy. Conceive of freedom. That you are completely free. How will you conceive this? For example. For instance, if you are made free, then it will be seen what is what and what is not. A person came to Hazrat 'Ali and said, "O 'Ali, am I free or am I compelled?" He said, "Lift one foot." Look, he was a Bedouin, but it was Mawla-e-Ka'inat. He said, "Lift one foot." He lifted it. After that, he said, "Now lift the other foot." He put that foot down and lifted the other. "No, no," he said, "lift the other foot while that foot is still up." He said, "Sir, how can I lift it? I will fall." He said, "You are this much free and this much you are compelled." This was freedom and compulsion. Did you see? This is the lesson of freedom and compulsion. So here too, conceive of freedom. And to explain the concept of freedom, I will give you an example. For instance, you see the railway tracks. On the railway tracks, there are two tracks, completely parallel, placed before you. And on both tracks, you place engines. Of the same weight, same pressure, and same thing. The same, not even a particle's difference should be there. The fuel should also be put in equally. The same weight, the same pressure, the same matter. And you start both of them there at the same time, on the same line. What will happen? How will the two go? They will go parallel, or will one go ahead? It won't go ahead. Why won't it go ahead? They have equality. It's not equality. The real matter is that one should go forward and one should fall behind. This is what I want. But it won't go. They will both go equally. Why? Because you have tied their feet, sir. If you had freed their feet, you would have seen that one goes ahead and one falls behind. Did you understand? You have tied their feet with the force of gravity and all these things. Remove this force, then you will see. Similarly, another example of a gun. Take a gun. You know this, that your trigger, when it works, it hits with one pound or two pounds, whatever it is. That's its impact. And you have the bullet. Now you hit the bullet. As soon as you hit it, what will happen? The molecules of that bullet, the molecules that are inside that bullet, all those molecules, with that pressure, with that impact it has received, they will go together in a straight line for a mile if the range is a mile. There can never be a difference in it. But as soon as the pressure is gone, freedom is gained, you will see, one falls here, one falls there, one falls here, one falls there. So it is known that freedom is needed. Then they can move forward, they can go ahead and behind. So in the same way, there, they were created free, not slaves. Their feet were not tied. So since they were created free, whoever had the thought, had the thought. One had the thought. So what can be done about it? And if one had not had the thought, then in the world, counting would not have started from one. It's possible that it would have started from ten, or fifty, or a hundred. And you would say, "I don't understand this." But since you, from your childhood... from history, you have been seeing that counting starts from one, so it doesn't even come to your mind that counting does not start from one. That is why you count from one. So it is known that that one being, Allah's... he did Tawhid, and from Tawhid Rabb al-'Alamin, what did he do? He obtained that virtue which he had to obtain. And in that respect, what is he called? 'Aql-e-Awwal (the First Intellect). The first 'Aql. Now I will tell you what happened after this. Now the series has begun, and you will find out that this 'Aql-e-Awwal, as soon as it became 'Aql-e-Awwal, the work that it had to do, when it did that work, at that very moment, from Allah Ta'ala's side, that thing was received. What thing was received? 'Ilm-e-ma-kana-wa-sa-yakun (knowledge of what was and what will be), Qudrat-e-Tammah (complete power), and Hayat-e-Abadi (eternal life). Sarmadi (everlasting). Now Hayat-e-Abadi and Sarmadi was received, he became for ever and ever. He became active, he did not remain passive. And Qudrat-e-Tammah was obtained. And he got 'Ilm-e-ma-kana-wa-sa-yakun. You will say, "Did Allah Ta'ala throw it from behind a curtain? Did he take it out of his pocket and give it?" No. There is no need to give it. I say that you brought a sword... I go to a swordsmith and I see a piece of iron, and I will tell him, "You have to make a sword from this." He will say, "This is a piece of iron, what are you saying?" "No sir, you just see." He will do the cycle, and after doing the cycle, he will show you the sword shining before you. You will say, "How did it become shining? How did the sword get its edge?" He will say, "I have brought it out from this very thing. The result of the cycle is that the sword has been made." So did he put it in his pocket? Did he put the cycle in his pocket? Did he put the sharpness in his pocket? No, it came out from within it. In exactly the same way, those things, those powers emerged from within. 'Ilm-e-ma-kana-wa-sa-yakun was obtained, Qudrat-e-Tammah was obtained, and Hayat-e-Abadi wa Sarmadi was obtained.
