and fate goes where it wants. We ourselves are entitled to this and responsible for it. So, this means we are the ones who bring about and enact predetermination and free will (jabr o qadr). And whatever deed is happening here in the world, the deeds we are performing, the responsibility for them falls on us. So, Allah Ta'ala gives us reward or punishment according to our intentions. So, this means that we ourselves are responsible for all our deeds. We are the architects of our own fate, and Allah Ta'ala has no [role] in this. But it is a favor from the Lord of the Worlds, it is His grace, it is His vast mercy above all else, that He, the Lord, has arranged it such that no matter how many [sins] you commit, no matter how much you blacken your pages [of deeds], it is better that there be something to erase the blackness of your deeds. And He opened a door of forgiveness. And how did He open that door of forgiveness? Through supplication (du'a). For this reason, He commanded, `ud'uni astajib lakum, innal-ladhina yastakbiruna 'an 'ibadati sayadkhuluna jahannama daakhireen` (Call upon Me; I will respond to you. Indeed, those who are too arrogant to worship Me will enter Hell in humiliation). Call Me, I am the one who accepts your supplication. Those who are arrogant, those who are prideful, they will always be made to enter Hell, and they will remain in Hell. So, Allah Ta'ala, by saying this, has made the matter clear. And He showed that supplication is such a thing that, `du'a taruddu al-qada` (supplication averts fate), `du'a taruddu al-bala` (supplication averts calamity), and `du'a taruddu... ahh... taqumu an-nadam` (supplication establishes remorse). Supplication also establishes remorse. This means that if there is a deficiency in our remorse, any shortcoming, then what is the thing that strengthens it? For that, there is supplication. So, it is known that it is the greatest weapon. It is called `Silah al-mu'min` (the weapon of the believer) for this reason: that if you can challenge nature, if you can shake nature, if you can move its ramparts, then you can do so only because of supplication. So, we did not have the etiquette of supplication. The Lord of the Worlds revealed the Majestic Qur'an to us. Allah... the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, gave us guidance through him, and through him and the book of guidance that He sent before us, which Surah did He place first? The Surah of Healing, Surah al-Fatiha, the Seven Oft-Repeated Verses, which is called Surah al-Hamd. Recite `Alhamdulillah Rabbi-l-'alamin` (All praise is for Allah, Lord of the worlds). This is the best method of supplication. First of all, there is the praise (tahmid) of Allah, that one should praise and describe Allah Ta'ala... just as when you make a request to someone, you present it to them with great titles, you do. So, here, in it, is an acknowledgment of Allah Ta'ala's greatness. He has been addressed with `Maliki yawm ad-din` (Master of the Day of Judgment). So, after doing all this, what do you ask of Him? You ask, `ihdina as-sirat al-mustaqim` (guide us to the straight path). O Allah, I want this from you, that you take me to the straight path. And do not make my state like that of those who went astray, who... who went astray and whose end was such. Save me from them. When you desire this, it becomes known that the one who teaches the best method of supplication is the Lord of the Worlds, who is teaching us through Surah al-Hamd. But the situation was that our du'at, our... the noble prophets, our noble Imams, saw that we do nothing at all and are very helpless, completely... very flawed, and very remiss in our actions. We, whatever we have to ask for, we don't even have the etiquette to ask. As Iqbal clearly said, 'Humans are proud of the power of their speech, [but] the ignorant do not have the etiquette to speak.' They don't even know the etiquette of speaking. Now what to do with them? So he... all... these noble prophets, these great du'at, especially Imam Zayn al-'Abidin, peace and blessings be upon him, and Imam Ja'far as-Sadiq, peace and blessings be upon him, showed grace and wrote such supplications in which all things were included. Even the things we did not know how to ask for, they asked for those things too. Everything... brother, when you have to ask, and you have to ask from such a great elder who gives bountifully, why do you hold back from him? Why do you hold back in asking? You asked for just the exam, then you asked for that, you asked for this. No, no. Ask for everything from Him. Why? His grace is abundant, he has big hands for giving, and he will surely give. So, the Lord of the Worlds kept this door of forgiveness. And this... so I told you that this philosophy of predetermination and free will (jabr o qadr), under it come paradise and hell, and... paradise comes, hell comes, punishment comes, and reward comes. So, the Lord of the Worlds, how did he arrange this reward and recompense? So that we understand it and try to save ourselves from its punishment, and are encouraged to enter paradise. But what happened was that one has to bring up the Muslims again, that the Muslims presented this with such embellishment. The noble Qur'an had mentioned paradise in its pages in a very beautiful manner. It was presented very well from it... [unclear]... a lot... Allah Ta'ala has described paradise. You should read its description. That one feels a pleasure, a state of ecstasy, a method is established. So all that was done. But the embellishment that the Muslims added to it, and they embellished it so much, and polished it so, and enhanced their words in such a way regarding paradise, that even non-believers' mouths started to water. Wow, the paradise of the Muslims! Oh, this is the state of the houris and ghilman. Oh, that is the condition of the wide-eyed houris. Oh, this is the condition of the ghilman. This is the state of the rivers. Oh, that... So now they... they needlessly started to feel a pleasure, thinking, 'Brother, what is this all about?' And the Noble Prophet had only said this much: `al-Hasanu wa-l-Husaynu imama... qama aw qa'ada, wa abuhuma khayrun minhuma... al-Hasanu wa-l-Husaynu shababa ahl al-jannah` (Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are Imams, whether they rise or sit, and their father is better than them... Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the youths of the people of Paradise). These two, Hasan and Husayn, who are the grandsons of the Prophet, are both the leaders of the youths of paradise. This is the one hadith I find at this moment regarding paradise, which the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, is stating. So look, what did the Muslims do? Because they had... spite, they had enmity towards the Ahl al-Bayt, they had hostility. So they took out all their hostility. I have told you many times before, and I can narrate to you a thousand hadiths. I will narrate a thousand hadiths to you. That when a hadith came in praise of the Ahl al-Bayt, they immediately went to the hadith factory. Which hadith factory? There was a mobile factory whose name was Abu Hurayrah. This Mr. Abu Hurayrah, who perhaps knew the lineage of cats more than anything inside them, what did he know of hadith? He didn't know... come or don't come, don't eat. He only knew how to coin hadiths. And he fabricated countless hadiths. And they have neither head nor leg, as they say, neither this nor that... this... and he fabricated such absurd hadiths that one would burst out laughing just reading them. And the amazing thing is that one feels like mourning the intellect of the Muslims, that in the science of narrators ('ilm ar-rijal), they reject the hadiths of the best of people, 'Abdullah ibn Mas'ud, 'Abdullah ibn Rabaha, great elders of the faith, companions of the Prophet. They take the hadith of Shimr Dhi al-Jawshan. Shimr is the narrator. Did you understand? The one who became the sword of Yazid, who became the hand of Yazid, they take the hadiths of that Shimr, they take the hadiths of Yazid. So now, this is the condition of the Muslims... So I was saying that when those people heard this hadith, that `al-Hasanu wa-l-Husaynu sayyida shabab ahl al-jannah` (Al-Hasan and al-Husayn are the masters of the youths of the people of Paradise), both Hasan and Husayn are the masters of the youths of the people of Paradise, meaning they are the leaders of the youths of paradise, so they said, 'Wow, this must be the hadith.' They immediately went, those impure ones of the caliphs, they went and said, 'Mr. Abu Hurayrah, please take a hadith to him by 'Isha time.' He wrote down the hadith and immediately handed it over to them. And what was the hadith? `Abu Bakrin wa 'Umaru shaykhan ahl al-jannah.` (Abu Bakr and 'Umar are the old men of the people of Paradise). Both of them, all the old people who will be in paradise, they are their leaders. Now the question is, sir, are there old men there? Are there old people in paradise? It's a famous incident, a matter to ponder, that an old woman, an old woman, an unlearned old woman, was very wise. She goes to the Prophet and says, 'O Messenger of Allah, I have gotten wrinkles, my life is at its end, my feet are dangling in the grave. And there are no teeth in my mouth, no intestines in my stomach, my eyes are flickering, now my condition is worsening. This is my condition, now I will pass away in this film [state], and if I go to paradise at this age, what will I get there? What will I eat, and what will I drink, and what pleasure will I get? Just keep your paradise for yourself. Please kindly give me leave to depart.' So the Prophet said, 'O old woman, why are you worrying? You will enter paradise as a young woman.' So it is known that in paradise, there is no work for old people; in paradise, there is work for young people. So, I told you this as an example, that this was the state of affairs... this situation continued. So, the Muslims, the scale they tilted, they tilted that scale in a strange and peculiar way. Look at paradise, they took paradise and placed it on the 'arsh (throne) and made such flowery descriptions of paradise that even we became alert, thinking, 'O Allah, have I read something wrong?' Let me read the noble Qur'an again, let me see again what things they are describing. This is about paradise, this is about paradise, this is about paradise. It's a good thing, brother, it's about paradise. Okay, let's see, the mention of hell is also there along with paradise. After all, it's not just reward; there is punishment too. How is the punishment? They started to soften the aspect of punishment. To the extent of softening it, they softened the aspect of punishment so much, don't even ask. Brother, what is this after all? So, what they call the scale (mizan), mizan is for balancing, for making things equal. This, which in Urdu terminology you may or may not be familiar with, is called 'dandi maarna' (to cheat with the scales). This became a matter of cheating with the scales, where one thing was settled in place of another. And on one hand, the matter of hell cooled down, this side... the fire of hell cooled down, and the breeze of paradise began to blow. Now, one can't understand what this matter is. Why was this done? The real matter is that their scholars, their learned ones, their intellectuals, the great wise men... they are referred to with the word 'imam', they saw, 'Now what... how should we... how should we serve our own interests? How should we weigh our own side heavier, how should our business be established, how should the work be done? So, to lessen hell, to reduce the heat of its fire upon us ummah members a little, they brought out an aspect of intercession (shafa'at). That the Prophet is the intercessor for sinners (shafi' al-mudhnibin). Undoubtedly, we accept it wholeheartedly. Because we also believe he is the intercessor for sinners. But please explain, what is the meaning of shafa'at? Shafa'at means to join. By joining, it means... you say, what is called 'grace marks.' In an exam, if someone falls short by one or two marks, then give them a push and move them forward, brother, give them a little push. So, when there are grace marks, it's a matter of pushing them along. Here, there was no question of that. Now what is the question of grace here? Here, the matter had become so bad that now, for them... how can there be a state of grace here? So, the meaning of shafa'at is that of sympathy, of joining. Meaning, if in one's sins there is something such that the matter has become bad over just a small thing, then the Noble Prophet will intercede for him. This was the matter. And in whose hands was that matter? In the hands of the noble Ahl al-Bayt, in the hands of the Prophet and the Ahl al-Bayt... snatching it from their hands, everyone, this and that, all... it was handed over into everyone's hands, and this intercession... The Muslims went so far with intercession, read their books and see for yourselves. They said, 'If you don't sin, then what will you do? Go ahead and sin.' Did you hear? Please forgive me. Understood? Go ahead and sin. I am quoting this from the book. Sin... I... I am not saying this. Go ahead and sin, and make the scale of intercession heavy. Make the Prophet's scale of intercession heavy so that on the Day of Judgment, the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, is not embarrassed. Meaning, along with all the ummahs, along with all the prophets, here 'Isa is standing, Musa is standing, Ibrahim is standing, Adam is standing, everyone is interceding for their own ummah, saying, 'O Messenger... O Allah, forgive my ummah, forgive them.' Everyone is interceding, everyone is being forgiven. And the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, is going, and what is it? 'Were sins committed by your ummah?' 'O Messenger of Allah, nothing... O Allah, no sins were committed.' Then what will be on the scale? The scale should also be somewhat heavy. So the scale of sin should be so heavy that the Prophet has an opportunity to feel some pride. When he feels pride, then it will be known about intercession... did you see? This is intercession. This is the Prophet... the intercessor for sinners, for the Muslims, who made this scale of intercession heavy. And they made the scale so heavy that they completely sank our ship. The scale became heavy, the ship sank. So I was saying to you, they neither understood paradise as paradise, nor hell as hell. May God understand them. The situation is that regarding paradise and regarding hell, when they are asked, 'Brother, please answer a question.' There was a gentleman for whom I had asked the question. I asked, 'Brother, in paradise there are so many pleasures.' 'Yes, there are more.' He said, 'There are rivers too.' I said, 'The rivers too...' I said, '...I am starting with one pleasure, regarding the wife.' He said, 'You... you quickly come to the rivers too.' I said, 'Alright, the rivers too.' 'There are rivers, there are houris, there are ghilman, okay, I accept everything. But tell me, despite all this being there, there are so many pleasures of paradise, but after we die, how is our soul going to enjoy them? How will it benefit? Will it eat mangoes, will it eat guavas? What things will this soul eat? Will it meet the houris, will it meet the ghilman? With whom... with whom is its marriage going to take place there? With whom is this soul ultimately going to join? Look at the state of the soul and you... just now you... you said, 'You are crossing your limits.' 'Now stay within your limits.' Brother, what limit is it, I don't understand? What limit are they crossing? So, the real matter was that they did not understand at all. For the soul, there is a spiritual paradise; for the body, there is a physical paradise. They only have one paradise, so what can the poor souls do? Now they are sitting with that one paradise, the soul is also... bringing it there. They say, 'eternal abode' or 'blessing.' If they got it there like that, then they got it. Just that 'dawar-e peace' (domain of peace). So peace... brother, has it gone in peace or has it gone in what, has it gone into judgment? You should at least... clarify. No, he said, 'Just understand that everything will be good. We only want good.' Brother, you may want good, but there should be some explanations for it. The Qur'an is in your hands, the guidance of the Prophet is with you. You are not ready to accept the Ahl al-Bayt, you are not ready to ask the Ahl al-Zikr. So you please tell us. So, if they tell, they are telling this, look. They are telling this, and they have left the Ahl al-Zikr. So now come, now this paradise is such that they showed paradise in the palm of their hand, they showed such a paradise. So now, what will they understand of this paradise, what will they understand of this hell, when they have not kept the scale balanced? So what concept can they have of paradise and hell? Hell? They say, 'They will always be in punishment.' Brother, what punishment will they be in forever? Is the Lord someone who only punishes like this? Khalidin (eternally)... the word khalidin is not there... the word khalid is not there, tell me. Meaning khuld (eternity) means forever and ever. Does 'forever' have any meaning with Allah, or does khalidin mean until the end of time, meaning until the end of the universe? It doesn't mean anything. It means it is for one grand epoch (kaur-e a'zam). The punishment is not like that. It is a punishment for one grand epoch. This is the word khalidin. With Allah, khalidin means for one grand epoch. So anyway, one had to understand paradise and hell. Now, the ones who could explain paradise and hell are no longer there, and they have turned everything upside down. I was telling you that the People of Truth, those who understand, as I told you, for us, the one who divides paradise and hell, the Divider of the Fire and the Garden (Qasim al-nar wa-l-jannah), that Imam... Imam... of Paradise, is the person of the Commander of the Faithful (Amir al-Mu'minin). And now, the personality who is to come after them, the blessed personality, is that of the Riser of the Resurrection (Qa'im al-Qiyamah), and he is the one who will do all the reckoning, he is the one who will do justice and equity. He will be the God of the time... the work... is to happen in the world. And he will settle all matters of the people of paradise and the people of hell, and everyone's... so how? Does this mean that until now, no one has been declared a person of paradise? I have been telling you, what is the real paradise? To go to the high limit (hadd-e 'ali), and from the high limit to the high limit, and after that to the da'i, and from the da'i to the hujjat, and from the hujjat to the bab al-abwab, this is the Garden of Abode, near the Lote-tree of the Farthest Limit (jannat al-ma'wa 'inda sidrat al-muntaha), meaning to go to the Imam. And when they merge into the spiritual form (haykal) with the Imam, all these haykals reside in the tenth purgatory (barzakh-e 'ashir). The station of the tenth purgatory? Above the Holy House of the Ka'ba. The tenth purgatory, you know, is a waiting room. It is a waiting place. All the spiritual forms (hayakil) have to wait here, and all the Imams are waiting with their haykals. And here, for them, those forms of ours that have been released from here, that which is our soul, which is our form, which has been released from here, it is in the spirit and fragrance of its God, and they are stationed in their respective places. How long will they remain? Until the Riser of the Resurrection (Qa'im al-Qiyamah) comes, and after he comes, after the sultan comes, what will happen? He will gather all the haykals into himself and, taking them along, will depart. `fa-bi-ayyi ala'i rabbikuma...` (Then which of the favors of your Lord will you deny?). Allah Ta'ala says, `la tanfudhuna illa bi-sultan, fa-bi-ayyi ala'i rabbikuma tukadhdhiban` (you will not pass through except by authority. So which of the favors of your Lord would you deny?). You can never pass through except with the help of a sultan (authority). So it is known that the sultan is the one who is to come, the Riser of the Resurrection, who is to do justice and equity. When he comes, all the haykals will have to be released. But to go and merge into the haykal, this is in our power, that through our deeds we may enter, and the Imam may accept us too. Now, what will happen there? For the soul, a spiritual paradise, meaning there is knowledge ('ilm), there is gnosis ('irfan), there too one has to learn, to read... you might think that death has occurred, it's all over, eating is over, drinking is over, this nourishment is over, that nourishment is over. No. To read more, to do more, all of that is after death. What is there here? That is the most of all. This is because those who enter the haykal and those who progress through their stages, on every single step, they keep learning the sciences. They keep learning the sciences and continually they acquire sciences and gnosis and insights and all these things, and this progress continues. So for them, for the spiritual thing, spiritual sciences, and for the physical thing, physical... and for the physical thing, what kind of paradise? Now, the concept of paradise that people have tied for you, that is in its own place; what the Majestic Qur'an describes is in its own place. That brother, there are such pleasures there, such things are there, and those things are there, absolutely we too... `amanna wa saddaqna` (we believe and we affirm). We also believe. And what is that matter? The real matter is, should the soul progress, should the soul itself take everything, and the body not? No. This body of ours, this has been tempered in a great fire. This has been tempered by the fire of fasting. This has prayed prayers until its ears burst. This body is an act of hardship ('amal-e taklifiya). This is an act of hardship which you call a burdensome act ('amal-e taklifi). You will say, 'No, no, brother, don't speak ill of prayer. It is a hardship.' Brother, if it is a burdensome act, then why not call it that? It is a burdensome act. This is a burdensome act. So these burdensome acts have been done. Oh, Zakat is given with some difficulty. That too has been given. So everything has been done, all these acts of hardship have been done, so what is left out? When all these acts have been done, it is also necessary to receive its reward. It is this very body of ours that has done it. So when the body fasted, the body prayed prayers, the body did all the work, performed Hajj too, performed Tawaf too, went forward to strike the jamar, when it has endured all these hardships, it is also necessary for the body to receive a reward. And that reward too will begin from the grave. When you are starting the punishment, the reward too will begin from the grave. For this reason, the Prophet states at this level that `al-mawt raihanat al-mu'min` (death is the fragrance of the believer), that for the believer, it is a cause of pleasure. It is paradise, it is a cause of pleasure, and he will tour the gardens of paradise. So what is meant by touring paradise? First of all, he will observe this, that the resident who has departed from his abode, he is in the spirit and fragrance of Allah. The body will realize this first. And this body, which is made of our six residues, as I have described to you, what will happen to these six residues after our body decomposes? Nature will protect it. These are the residues of a believer; they are not the... mixtures of others that they should be burned in fire or thrown somewhere in water, or something done to them. These are the noble residues of a believer. They are not meant to go here and there. Angels are appointed over them. Nature will take this along, and justice for it will be done at the hands of the Qa'im. Just as all the haykals are to be judged at the hands of the Qa'im, which I will explain to you tomorrow, and the last lesson will be tomorrow. So in the same way, I am explaining to you what action takes place after that justice is done. It is that the haykal will be completely integrated and will progress from the tenth purgatory. But for the body, this will happen, that all the bodies of the believers that have been tempered in fire, from Adam until now, the first opportunity is this, and the first matter is that the ummah of Adam should be given the chance because they are very ancient. After that, the ummah of Noah, of... of Abraham, of Moses, of Jesus, all these ummahs of the prophets should come, one after another. But what happens is, after that, the Prophet... the ummah of the Master of both worlds will come. Undoubtedly. But what has happened is that we, those who have come, our fate is somewhat awakened, and the real matter is that we have come in the era of the Qa'im. The era of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, a thousand [years] has ended, and after that, the era of the Qa'im has begun; we have come in that. And those who are to come, they are to come in the dregs. And those who come at this time, they come as greater sinners. And if we call ourselves greater sinners, our children are even greater sinners. You can call them innocent, [unclear], you can name them the moon and the sun, whatever you like, but they are greater sinners. From the perspective of realities, they are greater sinners. And what can be done? If you mix a solution and shake it, then if you hold the glass, dregs will settle at the bottom. So this is the dregs. This is an era of dregs; at this time, people are being born, emerging from behind the veil. Don't even ask about their conditions. Those who are good are also entangled with much evil. Those who are evil are very evil indeed. So we who have come, we have been brought at such a time when our environment is extremely bad. The environment is so bad that there's the radio, here the television, here things from all over the world, here magazines, here newspapers, here... sometimes we read one thing, sometimes another, our mind gets disturbed, gets scattered. Although, 'a thing of beauty is a joy forever.' A beautiful thing is a good thing forever, Keats had said. But in reality, what is it that... our condition is this, that a single saying of a da'i weighs upon one's entire life. A single saying is very heavy. But we... where do we have the time to think? Look at the struggle of our lives. Look at our condition. Where do we get the time to think? So anyway, in such a struggle, our condition has become quite strange. So nature, obviously, after making us go through this condition, should also give us a reward accordingly. When we are enduring so many hardships, and... sometimes you are being called a Rafizi, sometimes you are being called a Munkir, sometimes you are being told something, 'They have no religion, they are neither Sunni nor Shia, what religion do they follow, God knows.' You, two days before... these people are among those who celebrate Eid two days early. What kind of taunts you have been hearing. Yes, you will keep hearing them and will continue to hear them. So, what you have had to hear, to lessen its intensity, the Lord of the Worlds will make you manifest first. That era of unveiling (daur-e kashf) that will begin after the... that... decision of the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, after justice and equity, who are the first ones to manifest? We will be. We will be the first to manifest. But how will we manifest? Here... in this very place, or on the land of Kuwait like this, or with such restrictions and laws? No, no, sir. These legal restrictions will not remain. These visa troubles will not remain. And such... such matters... the iqama, that is a strange thing, what kind of iqama it is, Allah knows. So these troubles, these things, for God's sake, will not remain. Go where you want, go when you want. And the Hazir Imam is present. They have been called Hazir Imam, Hazir Imam, Hazir Imam. Meaning, the sun has risen, in its light everything is illuminated. Now, in this floodlight, look at everything, nothing is hidden. This is not the darkness of night where every... every harmful animal is coming out of its hole and biting you, and thieves and robbers are also looting you. These are not such things. Now the era has changed, the era of light has come. It is unveiling (kashf), kashf means the light of day. The era is of the day. The Imam is present. Now you don't need to, brother, go and ask him, go and ask them. Come on, now the Imam himself is present, you can ask him. What is the question now? So the drum of the Imam is beating, and he himself, the imamate is... is ongoing. And what kind of era will that be? Just you... keep thinking about your troubles, and keep removing those troubles. You will get the concept of what the era of unveiling will be. The condition of the era of unveiling is such that what more can I explain in detail. Some du'at have written on this, don't even ask. Allahu Akbar. What they have described. I only told you one small thing, and they... they only said this much, that the human being, the psychological faculties he possesses, the intellectual faculties he possesses, the spiritual faculties of the heart he possesses, he will begin to utilize those faculties completely. Look, today science, our sciences that have progressed, these are intellectual sciences ('ulum-e 'aqliyah). In these intellectual sciences, the highest knowledge is science. And because of the advancements of science, how much benefit we are getting. Now, when the progress of science reaches this state, then in the era of unveiling, there will be no obstacle at all, so what progress will it make. And who will be the ones to benefit from these advancements? We will be. Okay, you will say, 'Brother, let's go, you have travel... transport, this and that... you are going to go sitting in a rocket, you are going to go into space.' Okay, everything is done. But what will you do, sir, in your house there are bedbugs, there are fleas, there are mosquitoes. What troubles there are, the human's... what is the state of diseases? This epidemic has spread. Oh, what epidemic is it, sir? While reading here... this has happened, this calamity has happened, don't go to that place, please show a health certificate that you... are not afflicted and have come. So now, what are all these things? They are not there at all. There is no mosquito, no bedbug, no flea, no fly. That's it. Now who would not like to live on such a land? No mosquito, no bedbug, no flea. Why? Why are all these here now? It is because you are in a state of retribution (qisas), of inclination (mailan), of approbation (istihsan). Now your... what are you doing day and night? You are paying your approbation, you are paying your retribution, you are paying your inclination. You... in the process of paying, you are heedlessly, imperceptibly, paying everything. Everything is being paid by you. So diseases are also coming, why? Because your body is not filtered, your body is not clean, and it has taken on a lot of accounts. It is taking all the accounts from you. Fever, chills are happening, that is happening, this is happening, a cold is happening, you are enduring all things. Why? Brother, it is because you have to do everything so that you... for this reason the Prophet had said, from this... angle, at this place, that for you, this is salvation from sins. Sins are shed through fever etc., and sins are washed away by diseases. So if they said this, this was the meaning of it. So when our very body has come clean and pure, when you have been thoroughly washed and have entered the era of unveiling, then what is the need for these diseases? So the situation became neither disease nor illness. Now if a disease is happening, then for what? For passing away. At the time of passing away, a disease came and everyone got the news that so-and-so has fallen ill. So they said, 'Sir, let's offer condolences from now. Because now the disease has come, so he is about to depart.' So you arrive and condolences are being offered. If you want that some picture of the era of unveiling should settle in your mind, and you want to see the era of unveiling in this very world, if your heart desires, 'Brother, show us the era of unveiling in this very world,' then I can show you that that era of unveiling is the Hazrat-e Imami. Today, where our Imam, peace and blessings be upon him, is, and you know, he is in the Great Sahara. He is in the Great Sahara, and the name of the place is Jabarsa. The insiders call it Jabarsa, and the outsiders call it Jabalsa. This... but no one can reach there. A fly is appointed there that, if it bites, a person dies. So look, all these are the crafts of nature. Otherwise, ten thousand angels are appointed, the air and sea forces of Allah are all present. Then, 'whom Allah protects, who can taste them,' it is like that. Who can interfere there? But in that Hazrat-e Imami, where countless believers are present, but they are present, so you look at it with great longing, 'If only our deeds were also so good that we could also reach there.' Yes, you don't reach there based on your deeds being good or bad. You are inferior, they are superior, it is not like that. Rather, in some cases, they are inferior to you there. Many people there are inferior to you. The real matter is that a sweeper, a cleaner, can enter the king's palace, but a prime minister is not granted permission to go. So don't understand from this that if you did not reach Hazrat-e Imami there, you have become very weak. But if you have filtered your body, then just as you have become worthy of entering the era of unveiling, in the same way, you have become able to enter Hazrat-e Imami. So, some people were told, those whom our du'at, our manasik pointed to, they certainly went to Hazrat-e Imami. As was said for Maulana Fazal Ali Sahab, as was said about Yasin Sahab who was the qadim of Bombay. What did he say? 'He will not come into this world,' Baba had said. So it is absolutely certain that he went. Now he has no connection with this world here. Sometimes this kind of thing happens; it is not always like that, that groups after groups are going, it is not like that. But it definitely happens. So these... these are the blessings of unveiling, these are the mercies, from which many blessings we will enjoy. You see, there are such pleasures, such fruits; if you get them from somewhere... they come, you eat them; if they don't, then nothing. But there, the situation is that everything is present everywhere. It is not that mangoes are only in India, it is not like that. It is happening in the whole world. Everything is happening everywhere, so everyone is getting everything. So there will be no shortage of anything anywhere. And the greatest thing of all, the greatest thing of all is that everyone will be a believer. Not a single disbeliever will be there. As they say in Urdu, for a cough, there's nothing to apply. Like that, there will be nothing. Not even one, sir. If it's not there, it's not there. He said, 'Where will this be now?' Those who are in stones and minerals, in mines, in mountains, in rivers, after all, what are they? They are all from there who will come, they will all go. And we will just... come. Who will be on the veil of manifestation? Who will be on the scene of witnessing? We will be. We will be there, and it will be our era. Because this era of unveiling... when we have endured hardships, now we will also take its reward. So anyway, this is the era of unveiling, in which the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, will send our noble residues in such a way; this is his justice, this is his equity. I will explain it to you tomorrow. But I am telling you that this will be the action upon it, and we will see the era of unveiling. And these... these things our... we will get all the blessings, and our soul which is released, it will acquire pleasures in this way and will benefit from the sciences and arts and all things. Progress will continue in this way. Now remains the matter of punishment; this was about reward. The state of reward is for the believers. Now, the state of punishment, and I had explained the state of punishment, how the state of punishment is. I hope you have kept it in mind. And those who fear punishment will surely keep this in mind. Why wouldn't they? Even if it is anyone's punishment, punishment is punishment, it is something to be feared. The punishment begins from the grave, and I had said it will begin from death. And how will it begin from death? The sensory soul gets trapped in the physical soul. This is the greatest punishment. And they, with the vegetative soul, and those who have not accepted the da'wah, they have been buried with the sensory soul itself. This is the greatest punishment, the punishment of the grave. Now what will Munkir and Nakir ask? This sensory soul, this vegetative soul itself will question them. Now they are buried with this itself. And even the believer is not free from the vegetative soul. If, say, he has such good deeds, then he is freed. If not, then he is imprisoned with it for at least three days. The negligent believer or the believer with shortcomings, for him to be... to be freed, it will take him three days. And for three days, that too if he has chosen, if he has eaten the food of ziyarat, food is very important. Don't think that just by having the food it is so. This common idea that is going around, 'Brother, it is better to give a scholarship instead.' These are all wrong things. All these thoughts... remove this short-sightedness. I am telling you the inner matter. That it is a special thing that you are leaving behind. And along with it, reciting the Fatiha, and reciting Yasin Sharif, reciting the noble Qur'an, will be a cause of betterment for them, and they will be freed. When they are freed, it is obvious that now they will progress. But I was talking about punishment... I was talking about giving punishment to those who deserve punishment. I have told the reward to those who deserve reward. I told you how they will be included in the haykal. I told you this reward, the spiritual one. I also told you their recompense, their prize. That in the era of unveiling, how your situation will be and how you will be in comfort... in the gardens of paradise. Both these things. But how will the disbeliever get punishment, how will the disbeliever get punished, all this has to be told to you. So I was telling you, and I have already told you, that whatever happens to the disbeliever, meaning those who are not Sulaymani, all of them, according to their respective ranks, from where will their punishments begin? They will begin from the grave itself. After the grave, the second stage that comes, which stage is that? That second stage I explained to you, in detail, is the darakat (lower levels). In the darakat there is raqs, raks, naks, waks, 'aks, and daks. These are the seven lower levels. The first lower level is that of the human form, which is of the Abyssinians. The second, third, fourth, fifth lower levels are all of animals. Which is the second lower level? It is of the monkey and the bear. After that is of predators, meaning beasts of prey. After that is of the insects of the earth, and at the very end is of birds, and after birds is of vegetation, and after vegetation, the seventh lower level is of minerals. After traversing these darakat, where will he be taken? To the peripheries (atraf). Polar... he will be taken to the poles. The north and south poles, and at the poles, they will be given punishment. There, they will be... big... meaning, they will be joined. They will be given punishment after being joined, and they will be punished there in the form of huge animals, and they cannot even move from their places. They are in such a condition. From the snowfall... and all... they are given punishment in the form of such animals. And this punishment is only given to those who are sentenced to death. Meaning, the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, for whom he will decree that the punishment of Saqar, this... the punishment of hell is necessary for them, they will be given the punishment of the peripheries. Otherwise, they will not get the punishment of the peripheries. And for whom the Qa'im will say, 'No, they have received the punishment of the darakat, that's enough,' they will be turned back. Because everything is in the hands of the judge, and the Qa'im, he is the God of the time, the Lord of the time. And whatever he is saying, that decision is the final decision, a divine decision, a decision of judgment. And he will make this decision that now, with the darakat, it is over, so now what will happen? Now they will ascend on a good path. Vege... in minerals, what... now they will become gold, they will become jewels. And then they will come into vegetation, they will become good things, they will become edible things, they will become vegetables. And after that, when they come into animals, they will become such animals that will be permissible (mohallil). Under your knife, they... they will be slaughtered, and after that, you will eat, and sperm will be formed, and then the temperament will become balanced, and the mill of nature will turn, and with that, they will manifest as human beings. So anyway, they will come again like a blank piece of paper, they will come in a straight... way, like a plate, and the matter of inscribing upon it is that the da'wah of the du'at will be presented to them. If they accept, good. If they don't accept, then as their case will be, so will be their punishment. So anyway, I... I was telling you that those people for whom the Qa'im says, 'Brother, for them is the punishment of Saqar.' Those who opposed the prophets, who opposed the Imams, who opposed the Messengers. Will they be let go just like that? No, they will not be let go. So they will be caught... I will explain all the details of that tomorrow. But right now I am explaining that somehow, the entire army of God will catch them and will take them and put them where? In hell. What are the entrances to hell, how they will be taken, all those details are for later. But I am saying that they will have to reach hell. After enduring the punishment of the peripheries, when will they have to reach hell? When the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, manifests and commands that they should now be punished. When they are given the punishment, not until then. When the matter of giving them punishment comes, and when they are taken into Saqar, then, God forbid, God forbid, God's refuge, that... that punishment for which Allah Ta'ala has said 'a severe punishment' (`'azabun shadid`), `zaqum wa 'azabun alima` (the tree of Zaqqum and a painful punishment). Oh, such are the foods that get stuck in the throat. What a severe punishment it is, O Lord. What we call... mental teasing. This is the most severe punishment of the Lord of the Worlds, which will be in Saqar. And I told you regarding Saqar, how is that Saqar made? It is like a pot, a pot that has been placed upside down. Its mouth is at the bottom and its base is at the top. So it is closed from the top, open from the bottom. And it has 70 valleys. It is very large, such a large part, although we have the dimensions. But the point is that it is so large, so vast, that entire cities can fit in it. Those who have to endure the punishment are also many. Entire cities can fit, entire mountains can fit. A lot can fit inside. And how is it made? It is made from the components of sulfur. It is all... from gunpowder, from lime, from alum, from potash, it is made from such things that are explosive and bursting. From such things, all of it... is made. Meaning, the potter and the clay of the pot are one and the same. As the soul, so the angels. If you burn there, if you live there, it will be in such a way, just the kind of environment you wanted, that is the environment. `tamutuna 'ala ma ta'ishun.` (You die upon what you live). Your death will be upon what your life is. So as you lived your life, so will be your death. Now you have gotten a place just like that. Now you live in that place. Now in that state, what will be the condition? Now listen carefully. That they, God forbid, God forbid, there they will be given such a severe punishment that as soon as they enter, when... as soon as they enter, right upon entering, Allah Ta'ala will... a normal human being, the way a human is, has one head, two hands, two feet, the way a human is, He will not keep them in that state. He will immediately make him abnormal. And he will have three heads, ten hands each, understood, some different... strange feet, in some such strange way he will come into that state. The situation is that he is writhing in this way. Some images must be coming to your mind. The idols of temples must be coming to your mind. Yes. So now... what is the real matter? Now these three heads and four hands, why are all these things coming? The real matter is that when they are beaten there, and after being beaten repeatedly when they come back there, then after coming, because even then they do not want to be corrected, they go and whisper in someone's ear. `yuhi ba'duhum li-ba'din zukhruf al-qawl ghurura.` (They inspire to one another decorative speech in delusion). They go and inspire in the ear, meaning they speak. And what do they say? 'Brother, make an idol of us.' 'Brother, what kind should I make?' He says, 'The reclining Buddha is done, let's have a standing Buddha.' Brother, standing is done, let's... let's have a sitting Buddha, let's have a lying Shiva, give us four hands, give us ten hands, put a snake around our neck, and put a lotus flower in our hand. There you go. Take the lotus flower too, put the snake around your neck too. Whatever you said, do it. They all come from there and say this, and they keep doing it. And these idols keep being made. They are made of gold, they are made of everything, they are even made of cow dung. And they are made of everything, they are also made of sweets, sometimes when they get hungry, they eat them too. They are made of everything... they make everything. Now, if all these are being made, how are they being made? These are all the forms from there. And our elders said a great saying, a very interesting one, and what did they say? That if you want to see their forms, in one place, you want to see everything in one glance, that if one tours paradise, one should also peek into hell. May God not take us there, but brother, what are they like? So they said, 'If you really want to see the tour of hell and you are so fond of it, then go see Ellora-Ajanta.' What an excellent art gallery it is. What an excellent art... you are sitting there, thinking and thinking, amazed. What are you thinking? So he said, 'Just look.' So now, what is there in all this art? This is all the art from there. This is all the art from there, and all this is... the craftsmanship from there. They suggest all this from there, and they do all this. Otherwise, who are the ones doing it? They say, 'It's inspiration.' What things came that set a wave in motion. On stones, such things... have set a wave in motion, don't even ask. So now who are the ones setting this in motion? They are the same ones. They came and whispered, they said, 'Look, I am Lakshmi, I am... whatever god or goddess I am, I am the owner. My words should be worshipped accordingly.' Now in Diwali, other worship is also happening, so they are also being worshipped. So all these things are from there. They go there... after going there, this becomes their condition. Now look at the condition that... the condition is that each picture is newly terrifying, that someone has one eye, someone has two eyes. You make a Cyclops with one eye, there they have already become Cyclops. And the condition is that... they start to feel terrified looking at each other. And in a state of terror, what happens? They are already... suffering, and they have gone and gotten stuck. And along with being stuck, just as someone is troubled by heat or cold or some other thing, they are already... all... all conditions are troubling them. So, 'war has come, war has come,' what do they do? They start fighting with each other. And when they start fighting, the situation is that they grab each other and break someone's head, break someone's hand, break someone's foot. And here they break, here he... he dies, here he is alive. Here he dies, here he is alive. Here he dies, here he becomes alive. `la yamutuna fiha wa-la yahya.` (They will neither die therein nor live). The Qur'an says, 'Oh, hell is that in which they will neither die nor live.' Meaning, here they died, here they became alive. `la yamutuna fiha wa-la yahya.` (They will neither die therein nor live). They neither die nor live. Here they die, here they are alive. This is their punishment, that they keep tasting the punishment of death at all times. So they are killing each other, scratching, shedding blood, beating, drinking. And the condition is very bad. And the condition of some, which the Majestic Qur'an has described, keep reading the details in the Majestic Qur'an. In it, it is said, `subbuhu` (pour over him), they will be made to drink such a vile thing that a person can't even... how will he take the name? They will be made to drink such blood and other things. And they, hot... going there... this has no meaning. The meaning of fire there is that the light of the sun shines there at night. At night, the sun's light, its rays come so powerfully that because of them, they are set ablaze. And they burn to such an extent that their bodies... the burning, the smell of burning skin begins. This happens from the sunlight. And in the daytime, they start to burn from the light of the moon. Did you see? In the daytime from the light of the moon, at night from the light of the sun, they are afflicted, and this heat is so intense that in it, God forbid, God forbid, in a very severe punishment, their life is, they have to endure it. These were some different kinds of punishments, and after the situation, there are different valleys. Obviously, according to the fragrances, they have different valleys. And its last valley, whose name, God forbid, God forbid, it is forbidden to even take its name, such... such a bad valley it is, whose name is Tabut. And it is the worst valley, and it... there, such people will be punished who opposed the prophets, who opposed the Commander of the Faithful 'Ali, who opposed Imam Husayn, who opposed such... such elders, they will be taken there. They are, except as Allah wills, only a few people who are understood, known and understood. They... may Allah Ta'ala save us all from this punishment of hell, and may He give us salvation from it for the sake of the Imams, for the sake of the pure Ahl al-Bayt. Anyway, they will have to suffer all these punishments, and they will have to endure the punishment. Why? Until Khalidin (eternity). Khalidin, they will remain forever and ever, and that... what does remaining forever mean? It means that they will have to complete the duration of a grand epoch. Until a grand epoch, they will have to endure this punishment, and when they have endured this entire punishment, then from there... but let me tell you one thing, it will become more interesting. And that thing is that one will go into this hell, but who will be its... standard-bearer? Who will be made to enter hell first? That is Shaytan, whose name is Harith bin Murra. Harith bin Murra, who came at the time of Adam, was the son of Murra, Harith, he will be the first to be made to enter hell. And this... what is the real matter? That he is constantly going, constantly being beaten, constantly taking a beating, but he does not leave his devilry. He does not leave his devilry, and they say that he is constantly going and constantly doing devilry and is constantly reaching his place... [unclear]. So this is Harith bin Murra, whose... whose devil's progeny is who? The one who will sit in his place and who is his offspring. Just as the offspring of a good person is who? Those who follow his goodness and are called his offspring. Similarly in evil, those who follow in his footsteps, all of them are his... his offspring, his progeny, the progeny of Shaytan. So the progeny of Shaytan will continue in this way, and continually, their... will continue, and the divine punishment will continually surround them. And until the last breath, meaning until a grand epoch, they... 360,000 times 360,000, meaning a period of 400,000 years, and one epoch (kaur) of 400,000 such periods. Calculate it this way, calculate it that way, it is necessary for them to complete the duration of a grand epoch, and when divine things are imposed upon them, punishment is imposed, then no one can save them from the punishment. Now, after coming out of this punishment, obviously, the Lord of the Worlds will quickly bring them. So they will first be minerals, then vegetation, then animals, and after animals they will come in the form of humans, and the da'wah will be presented to them again. If, in a state of free will, they have done their work correctly, then good. If they did not do the work, then they will go again. So anyway, the one who makes these decisions... whose job will it be? It will be the job of the Hazrat-e Qa'im, peace be upon his mention, that when the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, makes his decisions. Now, regarding the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, what I have explained, you must have understood that... I will mention him tomorrow, how his session will be held and the court will assemble, and all this justice and equity will happen. But what needs to be told is that the weeks of our Imams that have been happening, seven weeks have passed, I said the first week was of the mutammim, the second was of the khulafa, the third... so this... of the a'imma, in this way the weeks I told of the mutammim, so there were weeks of seven each. So if there are seven weeks, then seven times seven is forty-nine. So our Imam today is the 48th Imam. And the Imam who will come after him, who will he be? He will be the 49th Imam, so this means that it ended with the 49th Imam. But what is the real matter? That this is the end, the conclusion. But the 50th and 51st, the count of these two is separate from them. What that means is the Hazrat-e Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, and the one who comes before him, the Mahdi, peace and blessings be upon him. The Mahdi who will come before him, about whom it is all famous that he... the promised Messiah who has come, who will come in the shadow of Jesus, so-and-so will come, what they are saying, in reality, he is the Mahdi who is to come before the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him. So the one who is to come before the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, is the Mahdi of the end of time, and he will be on the front of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him. And the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, will come on the front of 'Ali. So just as I am telling you today, that if you go to know, in the era of the Prophet, look at the time of Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib, whose era is the era of Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib? The era of the Prophet's grandfather. Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib's two sons, Maulana Abu Talib, Maulana 'Abdullah. Abu Talib, the father of 'Ali, and 'Abdullah, the father of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him. Now, just as the picture was set here, the picture is here in the same way. Our Imam today is the greatest Imam, the highest Imam, such that no Imam comes in comparison to him, except for the Imam of the first week, leave Imam Hasan, Imam Husayn etc., leave them. After leaving them, all the Imams who have passed, greater than all of them is our Imam today, who is opposite the grandfather of the Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him. But you know his name, it is Maulana Muhammad bin 'Ali, salawatullah 'alayh, and he is on the front of Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib. Now you will have two sons, one son will be opposite Maulana Abu Talib, the other son will be opposite 'Abdullah. The son of 'Abdullah, in reality, will be... who will he be? The Mahdi of the end of time. And the son of Abu Talib will be the Riser of the Resurrection. Now what is it? Since it is the end of time, for whom are we waiting? We are not waiting for the Resurrection, but rather we are waiting for the Mahdi. We are waiting for the Mahdi, and what does the wait for the Mahdi indicate? The Qur'an says, `inna as-sa'ata aatiyatun baghtatan` (Indeed, the Hour is coming suddenly). That... `ayna mursaha` (where is its mooring?). You do not know where the Resurrection will be moored, and you do not know that the Hour, the Resurrection that is to come, it is to come suddenly. So the matter that is sudden is all that of Maulana Mahdi-ullah, salawatullah 'alayh. His coming will be sudden. And the coming of the Qa'im, peace and blessings be upon him, that is a known and understood time, hour, everything, the day, the date, everything is fixed. Nothing is hidden. You will ask, 'Brother, is there any difference between the two?' God willing, I will explain it to you tomorrow, otherwise there will be no topic left to speak on tomorrow. So I am leaving this, that between the Qa'im and the Mahdi, how much... what is the distance, and how will the manifestation of the Mahdi happen, and what work will you do at that time, and how will the manifestation of the Qa'im happen, how will he establish justice. But even before that, I have concluded this matter, that those who are given... punishment, how will they suffer the punishment, and those who are given reward, how will they receive the reward. `wa akhiru da'wana an al-hamdu lillahi rabb al-'alamin wa-s-salatu wa-s-salamu 'ala rasulihi-l-karim...` (And the end of our supplication is that all praise is for Allah, Lord of the worlds, and peace and blessings be upon His noble Messenger...).
