I had mentioned this in the context of the ruh (spirit), that the evil apparition, the one we call the tasawwur-e-khabith, or evil apparition, I had mentioned its possibilities and stations, where they reside, what their state is, where they ride, and what kind of harm they inflict. And in the end, after they are exhausted, they are caught in the kuzatain (the two prisons) at night. But as long as they remain in the world, they cause a great deal of corruption. One might think, why are they left loose? What is gained by leaving them unbridled? It would be better if Allah's police caught them. But what can be done? Your system of accounting is such that they are compelled to settle their accounts, and you are also compelled to give your accounts. They have been let loose for this reason, that there is a give-and-take with you, and that give-and-take of all things must be finished. And for this give-and-take, you have to be ready. So, some give-and-take happens. What happens? Sometimes your day-and-night accounting and give-and-take continues, but sometimes a robber comes and snatches your money from your hand and runs away. In the same way, these entities also resort to mischief. They engage in mischief, they do give-and-take, and they do mischief. In short, they create havoc throughout the world. But most often, what happens is that due to our own heedlessness, our foolishness, our ignorance, we start inviting them. We invite them. At the very least, it should not be that we are so foolish, that we have so little intellect, that we invite such impure spirits from which we seek refuge by saying "*'A'udhu billahi min al-shaytan al-rajim*" (I seek refuge in Allah from the accursed Satan). We seek refuge, but we don't refrain from inviting them.

But we start inviting them. And I have told you how that invitation happens. The lines that we draw in front of our houses, and the various shapes we make and keep, through these they come. Or when you light an incense stick, lighting an incense stick over a picture has no meaning. It is wrong. What is this? This is puja (idol worship). It is a form of puja. If you have to light an incense stick, light it somewhere else, and its fragrance will spread. It does not mean you should offer flowers on a picture. This is... you have become worshippers of idols ('ubbad al-asnam), it has become idol worship. Absolutely not. Placing flowers... if you accidentally drop them, that is a different matter. But if you are intentionally placing them for this purpose, thinking that you are placing flowers... that is what happens. And performing aarti, which is prevalent among the Dawoodis today, is an extremely impure custom, a custom of the Hindus. Performing aarti, this thing of waving a lamp around, what is it? All these are their customs. What will happen from this? These impure spirits get a signal, and they get an invitation card. They say, "Come on, this person follows our ways, so let's go and set up our camp there." They come. Or, you were told that if you style your hair, first you should hide it. And if your hair is ever visible, your parting should be from the middle, not from the side. And you made the parting from the side instead of the middle. You were told to protect your hair; you started cutting your hair. You were told that if you keep your hair, you should braid it. You just tied it up... what you call tying it at the back. The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, said that this is the sitting place of Shaitan. This is Shaitan's seat. But you don't understand this.

So what will happen? It is obvious that this thing... the most beloved thing for them in a woman is what? It is her hair. So, from the hair, they will immediately start entering. And what other thing is there? I said that Shaitan's book is the mark of tattooing. These tattooed marks, the black dots they make, those who burn their hands and feet, and who make various pictures of snakes and other worldly nonsensical things, or get them tattooed on their chests... what is all this? This is all Shaitan's... these are writings, and on this, these people die, and they come, thinking, "Come on, this person follows us, this person understands us. This one is one of us." Do you understand? So, may God protect us from these things. We should not do such things from which... So, to adhere to such customs which we have been forbidden from... you are following those customs. What is it? A lamp is being carried with the bride. Hey, for what reason? That just as this lamp burns, she too should keep burning like a candle. Meaning, she should remain radiant. It doesn't mean, God forbid, that she keeps burning... she should remain radiant. If one took this meaning, it would be much better. But they don't take this meaning. What is it? That she should remain radiant. Like a lamp, she should be radiant. Hey, what does it mean to be radiant? What is your point in carrying a lamp? Now what happened is that they took it, and the lamp started to go out. "Oh, this is a bad omen! Do this, instead take a torch." So they started taking a torch. Why? So that it doesn't go out. Just as they started shining torches on the gods and goddesses, with globes, similarly, with our brides, we also started taking torches. This is all nonsense, and all this is imitation of the Hindus. And the Prophet said, "*Man tashabbaha bi qawmin fa huwa minhum*" (Whoever imitates a people is one of them). Whoever adopts the likeness of a people, his count will be among them. And "*tamutuna 'ala ma ta'ishun*" (you will die upon that which you lived). Your death will be in the same way as you spend your life. You liked Hinduism, so alright, your final reckoning will be done on Hinduism. As you sow, so shall you reap.

If we have, in our place, adopted the right path, then everything will have to be corrected. You will say, "I have taken the pledge of allegiance, now do whatever you want." This cannot be. If you have taken the pledge, then you must adhere to all things and also be aware of the Shari'ah. You might say, "I will remain ignorant, I will remain ignorant, Allah will forgive me." Hey, why did you remain ignorant? You will be caught for this from the very beginning. You will be caught from the beginning. That is why Mawla-e-Ka'inat said, "Whoever comes to me ignorant, I will break their nose, whether male or female believer." That is why it was said that one should seek knowledge even if one has to go to China for it. So, what we learned is that this thing is useless, and it is something that puts one in trouble. Shaitan misguides us, and in the same way, he comes through these tricks, and he will cause us harm. If we keep giving such invitations, he will surely keep coming and will continue to cause us harm. So, in any case, they keep creating havoc in this universe, and new uproars keep happening. The truth is, may God make me speak the truth, all the calamities, all the earthquakes, all those things... within the workshop of nature, even the natural calamities, as we call them, when they come, nature also works through them. Nature works through them. Storms blow, this and that happens. So why do we give the adhan? We give it for this reason: that these things are happening, and they are coming, but you should become safe in your place, so that your angels who have come for the adhan may stop them, and you may remain safe. And thousands of times such things have happened that when you gave the adhan, that thing was averted from you. Indeed, it happens. Why wouldn't it? When you take the name of Allah, why wouldn't it be averted? So, you should at least recite *La hawla*. You keep inviting them and also keep reciting *La hawla*. This makes no sense. You should seek refuge from it, and you should seek refuge completely. Because Shaitan... that is why the Prophet had said... see, this is a very great saying of the Prophet. The Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him, says that Shaitan runs with your blood. Hey, what is this thing? Why did the Prophet say this? He runs within your blood. This means that our sensations, our emotions, our feelings... within them, various things come to us, and we bring out new ideas from our minds. And man is never satisfied in his place. "Oh, I should eat something better than this. This should be more delicious." Oh, you've used ten spices, now you need to use thirty-two spices. You have done this, now you have to do something of a higher level. You have bought so many cars, now you need to add one more. Now one has to sit in a plane. Hey, what is this? You have transportation, things to wear, a bed, a place to live, a house, food to eat, drink... whatever you have... in that, you keep wanting more and more, going beyond the limit. And that is because you... you don't see that you are putting yourself into so much trouble. And you are becoming more heedless of the world, and you are becoming more distant from the din. You are getting lost. This should not happen.

And what do these entities do while living in this world? For them, this is fun. The moment they see any person showing the slightest heedlessness towards the din, they grab their hand. "This is my person." That's it. "You've only stopped going to one Jumu'ah prayer." "Hey, what's the need to go to this Jumu'ah? We are among those who go on Eid." What... "Alright, it's over." So this Shaitan... that is why "*khatamallahu 'ala qulubihim*" (Allah has set a seal upon their hearts) that Allah will seal their hearts. Allah will seal their hearts, and they will abandon everything, stop coming, and as for the da'wat... "what da'wat?"... they will abandon everything. So all these things... their thoughts will be ruined, everything about them will be ruined. So I was saying that they cause a lot of mischief, they do a lot of things. But Imam, peace be upon him... and I had also told you that... the plan of Imam that is running in this world, they also become aware of that plan. And because of that, what happens? They perform many feats of spiritual power and they... tell people that today, on some border or on some person, they become dominant, and they reach them, and from their pouch, a few things, some information gets gathered. So they go to them and show new spectacles. "What a Mawlawi has emerged! He blessed the water, and as soon as the water was drunk, the sickness was gone." "What a thing he did!" So, why wouldn't it happen? Surely, because they possess this spiritual power. They can perform many feats. But what is it? It is temporary. They cannot stand against the kingdom of Allah forever. But they do show some spectacles for a few days. And after seeing those few days' spectacles, we who are of little intelligence, we become their devoted followers. "Ah, what a holy man, sir!" "Oh, what a great man, sir!" "What a divine man, sir!" They are all charlatans and extremely useless. But you consider them to be a great deal. You consider... but Imam, peace be upon him, who is the *Imam al-ins wa'l-jinnah* (Imam of mankind and jinn), who is the Imam of the jinn and humans... he, if... a child... if parents have children, and among the children, some are mischievous, they don't throw them out saying, "Go into the street, you are mischievous." Rather, they are pieces of their own heart... of the parents. They embrace them too. He is the Imam, but what is he doing? He is watching, that after all, these are children. But they are very mischievous. If these are impure spirits, then what should be done? They have become evil. So, even upon them, there is the invitation of the Imam.

Just as we are being invited, we are receiving the *da'wat ila Allah* (invitation to Allah), that you should believe in Allah, believe Him to be without partner, do not commit any polytheism... in the same way that the explainers of the din explain to us, they too receive an invitation. That look, you too should come to the straight path. And you too should do it. So you think that they would accept it? Indeed, indeed, among them... there are surely some who... Now, this thought also comes sometimes, you might think that after dying, now if a person wants to choose the path of friendship, then everyone must choose it. No, it is not so. There are very few, rare, who accept this invitation and, after accepting, say, "Get us out of this trouble. Get us out of this trouble." And its incidents... there are some incidents like this which are present with us in the Da'wat-i-Sharif, written down as well. There are also some incidents that have occurred during the time of our old maratib. Such incidents have happened. That these very same impure spirits that are roaming about... that one evil spirit comes, and after coming, it is honored with the 'Ahd-i-Sharif (sacred pledge). Now you will say that if it is honored with the 'Ahd-i-Sharif, then what? It has no hands, no feet, it cannot fast, nor can it pray. So has it become equal to a mumin? Now leave all these questions. Right now, you see that if it is honored with the 'Ahd-i-Sharif, then upon it, such services are assigned, such things are imposed, which, being equivalent to prayer, fasting, and so on, put it into such hardship... that it has to perform those services, and only then is it released. So, such surat-s (forms) upon whom the pledge of the Imam, peace be upon him, is taken, it is rare. And it happens. Are you understanding the point? Are you understanding my words? So, this very pledge-taking, mischievous surat, the evil surat, what do we call it? What do we say? *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. Or we say *Jinn-e-Mahmud*. This is *Jinn-e-Mazmum* (blameworthy jinn), that is *Jinn-e-Mahmud* (praiseworthy jinn). In the world, there are only two types of jinn. One jinn is bad, one jinn is good. What they call *Jinn-e-Mahmud*, *Jinn-e-Mahmud* in the world, the term that has become common, that *Jinn-e-Mahmud* is only one thing. It is this: that it was a surat-e-khabith (evil form), but after taking the pledge, it became a good surat.

We call it *Jinn-e-Mahmud*. And we call it what? *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. This is one aspect of being called *Jinn-e-Mahmud*. The other, in a different sense... those muminin who passed away and whose surat-s (forms) were released and joined the haykal (spiritual structure), those surat-s are also called *Jinn-e-Mahmud*. If Imam, peace be upon him, takes them out from his... for example, if there are young men in a country, they are included in the army. The old are made to sit in office administration. In the same way, distributions happen. So understand that some surat-s are assigned some services. The ones to whom services are assigned are called *Jinn-e-Mahmud*. So, in *Jinn-e-Mahmud*, there are two categories. What are they? Either those to whom Imam has given a rank, or those who, after being mischievous, took the pledge and became good. They became good. So they are called *Jinn-e-Mahmud*. And those that are bad are bad. So these two... the evil surat-s, the bad surat-s, are countless. As many as there are people in the world, that many are their surat-s, and as many as their surat-s, their forms keep being made, and where do they go? In the end, after getting tired, after performing all their spectacles, the Kuzatain (the two prisons) catch them. The Rasuzana (wardens) catch them and imprison them. And their holidays, I told you, are kusuf and khusuf, meaning the times of the solar and lunar eclipses. These are their holidays, and they are released, and after creating havoc in the universe, they are again brought back and imprisoned. They are imprisoned. Now, for how long will they remain imprisoned? Until the appearance of the Qa'im, peace be upon him, does not happen, until the qiyamat does not come. The one who is going to take everyone's account will also take their account. Until then, their imprisonment will not end. So I told you that when a person who commits shirk (polytheism) or kufr (disbelief) or ilhad (heresy) dies... his tasawwur-e-khabith (evil apparition) separates from him, and this is the state of the tasawwur-e-khabith. It goes in this manner and gets imprisoned. Now what is left? After the tasawwur is minused, what remains? The hissiyyah (sensory faculty) and namiyyah (vegetative faculty) remain. The hissiyyah and namiyyah, I said that they didn't get any priority to be pulled away. That's why it spread in his body. It spread in his body, and after spreading, he was in a very bad state, and he was buried along with it. He was buried, and the torment of the grave ('adhab al-qabr) began for him.

The torment of the grave... some angels are not going to enter the soil and torment him, nor are there mace-wielders, nor are snakes going to bite him, nor are scorpions going to sting him. There is nothing of the sort. The matter is actually just this: that the hissiyyah which has spread in his body... that very hissiyyah will now give him pain. And you can imagine what kind of pain will be felt under tons of soil for a person. And if, suppose, they are being burned... you are thinking that very quickly, in a moment, how quickly the cleanup happened and how much... it was a qiyamat (calamity). It was a qiyamat. You are thinking that he has been saved from all torment, the hissiyyah is gone, the namiyyah is gone. Neither the hissiyyah goes, nor the namiyyah goes, but rather... you are seeing it in the form of burning, but the reality is that he is enduring the most severe torment. The one in the soil endures torment, but the one in the fire endures it many times more, the one who is burned. So it is famous that a very big scientist, who was... I think Oliver Lodge, who said... or perhaps... perhaps Bernard Shaw, or someone... he had said that his body should be burned. So when he was burned, he had told them, "I will definitely come and inform you what my condition was after burning and what happened." He definitely gave this news, that from the burning, and especially when my brain burned, I felt immense pain. Immense pain. So, it is obvious that from burning... why will the pain be felt? The hissiyyah is in it. The hissiyyah is in it, and it is obvious that that thing will be felt. Because that is life, but it is a non-existent life. It has a state, but it is definitely there. It was buried just like that. Because it was not a true death. Death only meant that the surat separated. Otherwise, the hissiyyah and namiyyah remained in his body, and he was buried with them. This is the severe torment which is referred to as the torment of the grave ('adhab al-qabr). Are you understanding? The torment of the grave is this torment. This is the first torment, which we can say is the starting point. The torments begin from here. Otherwise, what question would remain? The torments have not yet come. The torments are now about to come. And the mention of the torments is also about to come. And the torments are of three types. Remember these torments. The name of the first torment is 'Adhab-e-Adna (the lesser torment). The name of the second torment is 'Adhab-e-A'traf (the torment of the heights). The name of the third torment is 'Adhab-e-Saqra (the torment of Saqar). 'Adhab-e-Adna, 'Adhab-e-A'traf, 'Adhab-e-Saqra. Or, you can say 'Adhab-e-Adna at the beginning, 'Adhab-e-Akbar (the greater torment) at the end, and in the middle, say 'Adhab-e-A'traf. Now what are these things and what is it? I will tell you the details of what they have to go through. Now you will say, why has Allah kept such a severe torment? Why did he give this?

Look, He is the Just, the Wise, and it is obvious that with Him, there is nothing but justice. What kind of God is He? As you sow, so shall you reap. As one does, so shall one bear. He is not going to do... He is indeed the Most Merciful, the Most Compassionate, that is His essence. And that is why His mercy came even here... that despite having a mischievous self, despite having a mischievous spirit, despite becoming a Shaitan, a pledge is taken from him. His pledge is taken, and there are many whose examples we can also give, whose pledges were taken. And they left from here. So, but after their pledge is taken, what happens? That after taking this pledge, the ones I mentioned, they are called *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. Are you understanding? They are called *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. *Mustakhdima*... having lived in Arabia, you would have understood Arabic well... meaning those who serve. The services that are taken from them. And this... their station, the power station, their place of residence, this is all for the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. And what is that? The sun. They reside in the sun, and there in the sun, they have three divisions. One is called *Masikah*, one is called *Jadhibah*, and one is called *Dafi'ah*. These are their three divisions. One force is named *Masikah*, one *Dafi'ah*, one *Jadhibah*. And each force consists of how many? Forty thousand. Their number is forty thousand each, a total of 120,000. And they, there, at all times, at the power station, that is, in the sun... it is necessary for them to be there. At any given time, there... just as it is necessary to be at the station, there will be 120,000 of them. One, 40,000 as *Masikah*, the second as *Dafi'ah*, the third as *Jadhibah*. If there is no *Dafi'ah*, *Jadhibah*, or *Masikah*, then the affairs of this world will be ruined. Everything will be turned upside down.

What will be turned upside down? Look, if there is no *Masikah* (the holding force), then nothing can hold its place. Neither can a tree be rooted in the ground, nor can a pearl form in an oyster. Nor can anything have stability, nor can a child develop in the mother's womb. And the creative affairs of the universe, none of them can happen if this *Masikah* is not there. What is *Jadhibah* (the attracting force)? If the power of this *Jadhibah* ends, you cannot eat. Things are flying, you are running after them, and bringing your mouth to eat them, like an animal. Why? Because the *Jadhibah* is no longer there. As long as the *Jadhibah* was there, you would take the thing, put it in your mouth, and you would eat it. This was *Jadhibah*. And what is *Dafi'ah* (the repelling force)? If you want to expel something from your body, through perspiration or any other way... you cannot expel anything from your body if the power of *Dafi'ah* is not working. So we learn that these three powers are necessary: *Dafi'ah*, *Jadhibah*, *Masikah*. And for these three powers, these angels are working. And from there, the work is coming to the entire world. It's not that this one is a mumin, this one is a Muslim, this is a Sulaimani, this is a kafir. No. They are working for all of creation. And obviously, this work continues. But you will say, do these 120,000 just stay up there? Doesn't their army come down? No, there is a large army down here too. There is a large army down here too. A large army roams about. There is a land army, a sea army, and their... air force as well. And these three forces, the very first place where they reside is called *Israt-e-Imami*. Where our Imam, peace be upon him, is at this time, at that place, these *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*, in the form of land, sea, and air forces, are there as guardians. And their number is ten thousand. With a number of ten thousand, they keep watch there. And countless are spread throughout this realm.

And what have you done? To call them, there is only one signal. And what is that signal? The adhan. As soon as you are in trouble, and you turn to Allah and say "Allahu Akbar" and give the adhan, with the giving of the adhan, they will be present from somewhere or the other. Or from somewhere or the other, they will remove your trouble. So the adhan is the cause of calling them. And that is why we are told... that if there are earthquakes, storms, or anything, what should you do? Give the adhan and remove your troubles. Give the adhan, and as soon as you give the adhan... so these are the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima* that come. You say that a child fell from the third floor, but Allah saved him, some good deed came in handy. Hey, a deed definitely came in handy, but who was the one who saved him? It was the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima* that saved him. Except when it sees that the matter is of *qisas* (retribution), that here the give-and-take has to be completely finished... then there, it has to step aside. The *taqdir* of Allah comes into play, and that person or child will be saved or something will happen. But in most cases of being saved... "Hey, what happened? There was a stone here, a stone there, and he fell right in the middle. How was he saved?" And whatever was the cause of his being saved, who was it? It was they who saved him. These are the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima* that save. And these servants keep serving with great order. And the services they perform... the reward for those services, Allah elevates them. And when this reward starts to be given, they... when, after being taken from here, when that power station, i.e., the sun, calls them... before calling them, according to their intentions, sometimes some tasks have to be assigned to them. Sometimes this *Surat-e-Mustakhdima* even takes a form. It can take an animal form. It can take a mineral form. A mineral form... *jamad*... do you understand? A mineral form. Sometimes it takes a vegetative form. Sometimes it takes an animal form.

And where does it take a mineral form? When you go to Muzdalifah to pick up pebbles. The pebbles you pick up in Muzdalifah are in fact the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. These are things of the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima* that you are picking up. But you have to pick them from where? You have to pick them from Muzdalifah. When you pick the pebbles from Muzdalifah... you pick 70 pebbles... if you pick one more or one less, your affair is ruined. You picked 70 according to the Shari'ah command given by Allah, then your affair is correct. As you were commanded to pick them, you picked them that way, then it is correct. From where you were commanded to pick them, you picked them from there, then it is correct. And you wrapped it in your *ihram*, washed it, and kept it, and you used it to stone the jamarat. So these pebbles are in fact parts of the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. Why did they come in this form? Their service is this: that by being used to stone the Shaitan, their service is fulfilled. These are very great services. One service is that the pigeons of the Haram of Baytullah and the Haram of the Prophet are all these *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. These are the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. That is why it is strictly forbidden to kill a pigeon of the Haram. Absolutely, you cannot touch them, you cannot kill them. Because what do we think? What does the Islamic world think? "Oh, they live near the Ka'bah. They are neighbors of such a pure mosque. They shouldn't be..." Hey, it is because they are the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*. But why are they black? It is because the blackness has stuck to them. They were mischievous forms, they were mischievous before, and then they became good. So now that they have become good, they are good. But that blackness remained. That is why they are black pigeons. But the miracle is that it has been said that if they die... everything becomes lawful (halal) for you after you slaughter it with a knife under its throat. But when they die of their own death, they are halal. If a pigeon dies of its own accord in the Haram of Baytullah or the Haram of the Prophet, it is halal. But you cannot eat it. It is forbidden. But it is halal. Its death will happen by itself, it does not need a knife. It is halal. So for this reason, they are the *Surat-e-Mustakhdima*.

So I have also told you this, that you can observe it, that these things are. And there are many other things. In any case, to give an example, I have explained this to you... that see, all these are the wonders of the world that are at work. Similarly, do not consider Zamzam to be ordinary. And the greatest point of *Masikah*, the life of life... and the point of focus is the Hajar al-Aswad (the Black Stone). About which what can I say? It is a *qiyamat*. A *qiyamat* is hidden in it. So... in short, I had to tell you that all these things are the great symbols of Allah, great wonders. Thousands of things are hidden in them. What do we know? What do we see? We think that this is just a stone, it neither benefits nor harms anyone. "If the Prophet hadn't kissed it, I wouldn't have kissed it." This is also a matter of intelligence. Or as our explainers explain, it is a stone brought from paradise, and so on. Hey, at least try to understand what kind of stone it is, what this stone is. You should at least try to understand. So that stone is so pure that the Prophet kissed it, we kiss it not for that reason, but because it is worthy of being kissed. That is why we kiss it. And if it is moved even one inch from there, it is not worthy of being kissed. Did you understand? Today, the Hindus object to us that "if we Hindus worship idols, what do you worship? Don't you worship the Black Stone? You kiss it, you salute it, you make gestures towards it, you kiss it, you read supplications, don't you? We also do the same in front of the idol. That is also made of stone, this is also made of stone." But our answer to him is this, the answer we give is that... your idol, place it anywhere. Place it in the lavatory or on your head, or it may be being carved in a shop. But whether it is being carved in a shop, or it is made of silver or gold, or made of cow dung, or whatever, soil... but you are worshipping it in the shop, and you are also worshipping it in the lavatory. But our Hajar al-Aswad, if you move it even one inch... then we, let alone worship—that is a useless word—we will not even like to kiss it. Did you understand? So this means that the thing has importance along with its place. So the place has importance, and the thing has importance. Both things are intertwined. Otherwise, it would not happen. Otherwise, what would happen? These Banu Umayyah, the grudge they had against 'Ali, they expressed it with an open heart. And they expressed their grudge to such an extent that from the pulpits for hundreds of years, not only did they curse 'Ali and the progeny of 'Ali...
