...that the Anbiya-e-Kiram [Venerable Prophets] had presented before you. Today, the Aakhiri Nabi [Last Prophet], and Naatiq Nabi [Speaking Prophet], Rasul-e-Azam Nabi [Greatest Prophet], our Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam [Prophet, peace and blessings be upon him], his mention is to be made. Our Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, Khatam al-Mursalin [Seal of the Messengers], Sayyid al-Awwalin wa al-Akhirin [Master of the First and the Last], Sayyid al-Anbiya [Master of the Prophets], Rahmatan lil-'alamin [A Mercy to the Worlds], Ahmad al-Mujtaba, Muhammad al-Mustafa, sallallahu 'alayhi wa sallam [Ahmad the Chosen, Muhammad the Chosen, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him]—it is his Dhat-e-girami [Venerable personage]. And for whose Dhat-e-girami [Venerable personage] Allah Ta'ala said, "Lawlaka lama khalaqtu al-aflak" (Had it not been for you, I would not have created the celestial spheres). O Payghambar, if you were not there, I would not have created these celestial spheres, I would not have created the world. So, it is obvious how much 'azmat [greatness] and how much bartari [superiority] your personage must possess, that this Dhat-e-girami [Venerable personage] was granted such honor by Allah Ta'ala, and whom He made His Mahbub [Beloved] and called Habib-e-Khuda [Beloved of God]. And whom He made a mercy for all the worlds. In reality, the Dhat-e-girami [Venerable personage] of Sarwar-e-Kawnayn [Master of the two worlds], Khatm al-Anbiya [Seal of the Prophets], Khatm al-Mursalin [Seal of the Messengers] was just so. And your greatest attribute was that you achieved a kamal [perfection] in both Nisbat-e-Adna [Lower connection/rank] and Nisbat-e-'Ala [Higher connection/rank]. And the kamal you achieved in Nisbat-e-Adna, that same kamal you also achieved in Nisbat-e-'Ala. And this dohri kayfiyat [dual state/quality] was not achieved by anyone else. So this was a special characteristic of Sarwar-e-Kawnayn, due to which you were granted a special imtiyaz [distinction] among all the Anbiya, all the Awliya', all the A'immah, and all of creation. Regarding the Hayat-e-Tayyibah [Pure/Goodly Life] of Sarwar-e-Kainaat [Master of the Universe], Fakhr-e-Mawjudat [Pride of Creation], which Muslim does not know of it? There is no one who has not read about your Hayat-e-Tayyibah and Sirat-e-Mubarakah [Blessed biography]. Everyone knows, everyone has read, and you have always heard select incidents in majalis [gatherings] and so on. I will not narrate the entire Hayat-e-Tayyibah in detail before you, because that would be futile, and also because to narrate the Hayat-e-Tayyibah of Sarwar-e-Kawnayn requires a great deal of time. Because it is the matter of Khatm al-Anbiya, Sayyid al-Mursalin. And his Dhat-e-girami, as I have said, achieved such a degree of kamal in both Nisbat-e-'Ala and Nisbat-e-Adna that was not achieved by anyone among the Awwalin wa Akhirin [the first and the last]. So, the marja'-e-khala'iq [source/resort of creation] for the khass-o-'aam [the elite and the common] is your personage, both in Nisbat-e-Adna and in Nisbat-e-'Ala. And from that perspective, your Hayat-e-Tayyibah is very deep and 'amiq [profound]; its batin [inner/esoteric aspect] is very deep. And from this perspective as well, and if you look at the exoteric biography, your majlisi aadab [etiquette of gatherings], the states of your razm [battle] and your bazm [court/assembly], your tribulations, the ibtida'-e-Islam [Beginning of Islam], your spreading of Islam in the Sadr-e-Islam [Early period of Islam], and your Ashab [Companions], your states, your uthna baithna [conduct], nashist-o-barkhast [sitting and rising/daily conduct]—to narrate all these things requires a large daftar [volume]. As you see, some eight to ten volumes of the Sirat [biography] have been written. So it is evident that your Hayat-e-Tayyibah is quite lengthy. So, as I have submitted, regarding the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, I will only mention selected incidents, and I will only mention those things that have a special quality related to ruhaniyat [spirituality] and which give dalalat [indication] to those fuyuzat [emanations/blessings] and ruhaniyat of yours which are hidden from common eyes and are not visible to ordinary people. Please come a little forward. The very first thing is that, as you have been hearing continuously, and hopefully those things have remained in your minds, that when we began this matter and began the lesson, at that time I had said to you that at the Raas al-Dawr [the head of the cycle/era], when the world was created and it began, and with the beginning of the dawr [era], the Dawr al-Kashf [Era of Unveiling] came, and the beginning of the Dawr al-Kashf was from Qaymuruth al-A'zam [The Great Qaymuruth], the Imam-e-Awwal [First Imam], and from his progeny. And after him, Walad-e-Taam [Perfect Son], and his son, and his offspring, son after father—in this way, A'immah continued to come, and for 47,000 years, there was day. And after the day, for 3,000 years, the periods of twilight and dusk came, and then after the passing of 3,000 years, the Dawr al-Satr [Era of Concealment] began. And the beginning of the Dawr al-Satr—or you could say, the end of the Dawr al-Kashf and the beginning of the Dawr al-Satr—it happened through Mawlana Hunaid, who is our most venerable Imam of that time, and who was the uncle of Hazrat Adam 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, and whose name was Janaab-e 'Abdullah. So you saw that his brother Janaab-e Tanjum, his son Janaab-e 'Abdullah, upon him Allah Ta'ala performed nass [designation]. That is, nass came from Janaab-e Hunaid, and he was sarfaraz [honored] with Nubuwwat-o-Risalat [Prophethood and Messengership]. So in this way, Nubuwwat... Please come forward. In this way, the chain of Nubuwwat-o-Risalat also continued in its place, and the chain of Imamat and Wasa'it also continued in its place. I told you that Janaab-e Imam Hunaid came, and in the offspring of Janaab-e Hunaid, the Imamat continued, until after a thousand years had passed, Mawlana Hud salawatullah 'alayh [Hud, blessings of Allah be upon him] came into the world. He was established in the capacity of an Imam, and he saw that now there was a need to manifest a Nabi-e-Naatiq [Speaking Prophet], a Naatiq Nabi. There was a need for irsaal [sending], a need to grant risalat [messengership], and they—he—sent Janaab-e 'Abd al-Ghaffar, whose name was Nuh, which became Nuh because of his lamenting, into the world. That is, he appointed him, and Janaab-e Nuh spread the da'wah [call], and you have heard his story. Similarly, after Janaab-e Nuh, the time came when 1,000 years had passed, and in the chain of A'immah, there was Mawlana Salih, who performed nass on his son, Janaab-e Ibrahim. And Mawlana Salih, who was the Imam of the time, he saw that now a Nabi had to be manifested in the world. And he saw that among his da'at [callers], there was one whose name was Ibrahim; he chose him and made him a Nabi and Rasul and sent him into the world. And he performed Nubuwwat and Risalat. And by coincidence, he was also Ibrahim and the other was also Ibrahim, which caused a mughalata [fallacy/misunderstanding], and the story was turned from here to there. And what would Muslims understand anyway? They couldn't understand these things, and they kept making one mistake after another. In any case, after that, 1,000 years passed. The time of Hazrat Musa came. He was from the chain of the Mustawda'in, from the chain of the Nabis. He came in the capacity of a Nabi-e-Naatiq and was a Sahib-e-Kitab [Possessor of a Book] Nabi; the Tawrat was revealed to him. And the Imam of that time was Mawlana 'Udd. It was Janaab-e Mawlana 'Udd. And after Mawlana 'Udd, another 1,000 years passed. Now the turn of the sixth millennium is coming, and Mawlana Khuzaima came in his progeny. And Mawlana Khuzaima chose the best individual of his time. Although, in his era, there were many capable people present. There was Arastu [Aristotle], there was Suqrat [Socrates], there was Aflatun [Plato], there was Jalinoos [Galen]. There was Janaab-e Luqman. And I have said that the Ashab al-Kahf also lived in this era. Many hukama' [sages] lived in that era. And in the time of Hazrat Musa as well, Budhasaf lived, Yusuf lived, and Zinaash lived, and Janaab-e... Zardasht lived. All of these... So this was an era of Hazrat 'Isa and Musa that passed, in which all the hukama' were present. And many hukama' were such that they were superior to Hazrat Musa, but the Shari'ah of Musa was not brought to them. However, what happened was that the gaze fell upon Hazrat Musa 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. Whose gaze? The Imam's, Janaab-e 'Udd's, and he established him. Similarly, when Mawlana Khuzaima was established in his progeny, he saw that now a Nabi-e-Mursal had to be sent, and his gaze fell on Hazrat 'Isa, and he appointed Hazrat 'Isa. And Hazrat 'Isa... And you are seeing that every Nabi, when a Nabi is being raised, when he is being appointed, when nass is being performed on him, then along with the nass, he also establishes his wasi [successor]. Sometimes by his own will, but by the command of the Imam 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, from Janaab-e 'Udd, from Janaab-e Khuzaima, from Janaab-e Hunaid, they would always ask, and by their permission, by their command, they would establish them. There, Janaab-e Shith was for Adam; first there was Habil, then after that Janaab-e Shith. For Janaab-e Nuh, there was Janaab-e Sam. And for Janaab-e Ibrahim, there was Janaab-e Isma'il, and he gave primacy to Janaab-e Is-haq. And similarly, moving forward, the matter came to Janaab-e 'Isa, Musa. When it came to Janaab-e Musa, he appointed Sham'un al-Safa. First there was Harun, after that was Janaab-e Sham'un. And when 'Isa 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam came, you made Yusha' bin Nun your wasi. And Janaab-e... Hazrat 'Isa, the nass he performed on Janaab-e Yusha', was not without the permission of Janaab-e Khuzaima, without asking him. Because you would always remember your 'baab' [father], and you know, I told you that the 'baab, baab' he used to say was Janaab-e Khuzaima, whom you used to address. And from Mawlana Khuzaima you would ask questions and then, upon receiving the answer, you would act. Thus, you took permission from Mawlana Khuzaima and appointed Janaab-e... Sham'un al-Safa, or Yusha' bin Nun. In this way, the chain was moving forward. Now, the progeny of Janaab-e Khuzaima, which in reality is the progeny of Janaab-e Ibrahim, and which in reality is the progeny of Janaab-e Hunaid, but what happens is that we deal with the jadd [ancestor] closest to us. And since a dividing line had been established from Imam Mawlana Ibrahim 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, after him came Mawlana Isma'il, and the progeny of Janaab-e Isma'il continued. Kinhas and Qedar and those people passed, and these were all A'immah. They were Imams, they were masters, they were owners, they were lords, they were the God of their time. And they all were passing away. As they passed, Janaab-e Khuzaima came. And when Khuzaima passed, then in his progeny, now the era is changing, nearness is occurring, it is getting close to the time of Rahmatul 'alamin, and the time for the zuhur-e-qudsi [holy manifestation] is arriving. And who started to come? Mudar came, Nizar came, Lu'ayy came, Ghalib came, Fihr came, Fahd came, and in the end, among the ancestors of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, Janaab-e Qusayy came. These are all most venerable A'immah, and what can be said of their glory! Every Imam in his own place is an unparalleled individual. He is a shining sun. And their stories, with explanation and detail, are present in the books of history we have, 'Uyun al-Akhbar. You... the common people don't know. They only say this much, that these were the ancestors of the Prophet, and that they did not really have any particular form of worship, and it was a time of jahiliyyah [ignorance], and they believed in that and lived that kind of life. Whereas, all of these were the Hakim of the time, they were the 'Amir, they were Sultans, they were Awliya', they were the God of their time, and all these were carrying out great tasks. And they were seeing that now the era is turning, and which personality is going to manifest in their progeny. They knew everything. They knew everything. And I have mentioned to you before that all the 124,000 Anbiya who passed, although I only mentioned five or six Anbiya who were Naatiq Nabis, 'Ulu al-'azm Nabis, Sahib-e-Kitab Nabis. But otherwise, 124,000 Nabis passed. And the 124,000 Nabis who passed were for a village, a town, a community, a country. One was coming for each. But the need was for a Nabi to come for all the worlds, to come as a mercy for all the worlds, and to give them such guidance that would be everlasting, not one that would be erased. And the din [religion] should be presented in its complete form, and the law should be codified and recorded, so that not a single thing remains lacking. In this way, now the situation was that Anbiya... 'Nabi' means one who gives news. These 124,000 Nabis were giving news of one thing. Ultimately, what news were they giving? And common Muslims, while evading—although the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam had given hints, but despite that, evading it, they have written that they were givers of news about the Day of Qiyamah. Oh brother, the Qiyamah is this, that a person's death is his Qiyamah. And this Qiyamah is bound to come, inna al-sa'ata aatiyatun (Indeed, the Hour is coming), was this not known? It is mentioned in the Torah, it is mentioned in the Gospel, it is in all the books. So what else... The reality is that there was news of the coming of Amir al-Mu'minin. And there was news of such a personage who is characterized by being Haydar-e-Karrar, and the number of attributes that revolve around this flame of Imamat, it is highly unlikely to be for any other personage, about whom Sarwar-e-Kainaat has stated several hadiths in his praise, and countless nass [designations] were upon you. So, this is the personage of Abu al-A'immah [Father of the Imams], the personage of Nisbat-e-'Ala, the personage of Amir al-Mu'minin, and the personage of Sayyid al-Wasin, the personage of Qa'id al-Ghurr al-Muhajjilin. This was no ordinary matter, and all the Anbiya were pointing towards this, they were pointing towards Mawla-e-Kainaat, that a personage is coming, a personage is coming. Thus, their indication was towards your personage. And the last Payghambar to point towards this personage was our Nabi, Sarwar-e-Kainaat, Fakhr-e-Mawjudat, Hazrat... Ahmad-e-Mustafa, Mujtaba, Muhammad-e-Mustafa, sallallahu 'alayhi wa sallam, it was his venerable personage. And you came into the world, and you made this final point, that... what was that point? You indicated that the one of whom I was giving news, of whom the Anbiya were giving news, that Naba' al-'Azim [Great Tiding], that is Ali... the personage of Ali al-Murtada. And that is the personage of Haydar-e-Karrar, he is the Naba' al-'Azim. Because you had now come, and after you, Amir al-Mu'minin had come, for this reason, when the news has come, now Nubuwwat has ended. For this reason, you became Khatam al-Mursalin. Otherwise, guidance has not ended from the world, the task of Nubuwwat has not ended, the chain of wahy [revelation] has not stopped, and no task, neither the taking of the ummah nor the giving of the Nabis, no kind of work has stopped. All this work is ongoing, it is ongoing even today, it was ongoing yesterday, but only the names have changed. The names of the ranks have changed, the thing has remained the same, the station has remained the same, the work has remained the same, the same wahy and all that has remained. The name of wahy has become ishraq [illumination], and the name of that place has become da'at [callers], and their work has continued. The connection with the A'immah has remained just as it was before. Even now, the connection is the same, and that chain is ongoing in the progeny of Imam al-Husayn 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. So, you see that when Sarwar-e-Kainaat came into the world, from the perspective of Nubuwwat, your task was only this much: that you should point towards your wasi, establish him, and you did establish him. And you told, and pointed towards the Naba' al-'Azim. This task of Nubuwwat of yours was finished. What was the reality? That just as I explained to you in the Haqa'iq [realities], and told you about the 'alam-e-ruhani [spiritual world], that there, the reality is there, the ta'amur [spiritual realm] is there, and there you have to see that Sarwar-e-Kainaat went from Nisbat-e-Adna to Nisbat-e-'Ala. And this is a great state of mi'raj [ascension] that you have achieved, and the true mi'raj is this very thing: to go from Nisbat-e-Adna to Nisbat-e-'Ala. You were in Nisbat-e-Adna, there is no doubt about it, but where did you reach in Nisbat-e-'Ala? And what did you see? You saw that the one who was the highest in Nisbat-e-'Ala, he turned his face, and everyone turned their faces, and that venerable personage became the محور [axis/center] and the hub for the millstone. And whose personage was that? It was the personage of Sarwar-e-Kainaat. So, Sarwar-e-Kainaat was not just a Nabi. Rather, after that, he achieved a great rank, and that was of Risalat. Your feet did not stop at Risalat either; you achieved the rank of Imamat. They did not stop at Imamat; you achieved the rank of Wasa'it. They did not stop at Wasa'it; you entered into Imamat-e-Ruhaniyyah. You did not stop at Imamat-e-Ruhaniyyah, but went into Nutq-e-Ilahi. Then you traversed Juz'iyyat, traversed Fathiyyat, traversed Khiyariyat, and after that, you traversed the rank of Hujjiyat, and after that, you reached Hijabiyyat. This was the fast pace of Sarwar-e-Kainaat, who was traversing these stages of knowledge, which are called the heavens upon heavens, and to understand which, the intellects of the wise are bewildered. If we don't even understand one heaven, the heaven of Nubuwwat, then how will we understand all these countless heavens that were established upon it? It is very difficult. It is very difficult to encompass all these things. It is very difficult to understand the stages and states of Rahmatul 'alamin. So, in any case, the rank of Nubuwwat, I have explained to you, that the rank of Nubuwwat was only this much: that after oneself, one should establish someone and give the news about them, and after giving it, you were elevated from your position and reached the place of Risalat. Then you see that the same Nabi to whom the Qur'an is saying, "Ya ayyuha al-nabiyyu inna arsalnaka" (O Prophet, indeed We have sent you). "Ya ayyuha al-nabiyyu, ya ayyuha al-nabiyyu" (O Prophet, O Prophet), the Lord of the worlds was addressing him. As soon as you achieved the rank of Risalat, now He says, "Ya ayyuha al-nabiyyu inna arsalnaka shahidan wa mubashshiran wa nadhira, wa da'iyan ila Allahi bi-idhnihi wa sirajan munira" (O Prophet, indeed We have sent you as a witness and a bringer of good tidings and a warner, and as one who invites to Allah, by His permission, and as an illuminating lamp). See, there too, everywhere in the Holy Qur'an you will find this, "bi-idhnihi, bi-idhnihi, bi-idhnihi" (by His permission, by His permission, by His permission). By the command of God, by the command of God. But where does this pronoun point? The reality is that the pronoun of the material world points to the material, and the pronoun of the spiritual world points to the spiritual. And that pronoun is not towards Allah Ta'ala, it is towards that Allah—which Allah? The one who is made Allah by Allah, it will refer to him. And in the same way, you see that as I said about the ancestors of the Prophet, that Fihr came, Lu'ayy came, Mudar came, Nizar came, Qusayy came, until Janaab-e 'Abd Manaf came into the world. But he came into the world in such a state that 'Abd Shams was attached to 'Abd Manaf. "Satiza kar raha hai jahan mein da'im-o-roz, charagh-e-Mustafawi se sharar-e-Bu-Lahabi" (The constant conflict in the world is between the lamp of Mustafa and the spark of Abu Lahab). This... this mixture of good and evil is always established in the world. And I have told you that this is a matter from above itself, that you will always have to extract good from within evil. So, good and evil will come mixed in this world, and here too, the same factory of nature worked, and here, those who came in his progeny, with Janaab-e 'Abd Manaf, 'Abd Shams was also attached. This 'Abd Shams is referred to in the Qur'an as Shajara-e-Khabithah [the accursed tree], and the reference to Shajara-e-Tayyibah [the goodly tree] is this: "Kalimatan tayyibatan ka-shajaratin tayyibatin, asluha thabitun wa far'uha fi al-sama'" (A good word is like a good tree, whose root is firm and whose branches are in the sky), which Allah Ta'ala states in a verse. He is mentioning the ancestors of this Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. He is mentioning the Shajara-e-Tayyibah. He is mentioning these A'immah-e-Tahirin who are the ancestors of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. And that evil which was separated from his ancestors, now you will say, how was the evil separated? You see that—leave aside the fact that we start naming from here—the evil became embodied. Harb came, after Harb came Abu Sufyan, after Abu Sufyan came Mu'awiyah, and this whole chain, whatever happened, Yazid came, all of them became worse and worse, and they turned the din [religion] into a dunya [worldly affair]. They made a mess of the din. They destroyed it. They did not want to let the din remain in the world. They damaged the din so much, these people. This was the thing. Undoubtedly, their intentions were bad, they themselves were bad, everything was so. But the reality is that they were given the choice by Allah Ta'ala. There was some power of discernment. It was possible that they could have done some good, but they did not. So, in any case, this chain was established here. So here, both of them... one's finger was joined to the other's forehead. So, they were cut and the two children were separated. And 'Abd Shams and 'Abd Manaf... for Janaab-e 'Abd Manaf, he is the ancestor of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. 'Abd Shams is the ancestor of the Banu Umayyah. Now this chain of both... both were the offspring of the same ancestor, and this chain began, and enmity was established between the two with the sword from the very first day. At that very moment, a prophecy was made that a sword would run between them. Well, these are outward matters. I am telling you about the spiritual realities, and you should understand that these are all pre-eternal matters from there. Nothing can change them. One who is shaqq [wretched] is shaqq, one who is mutahhir [pure] is mutahhir, one who is mu'min [believer] is mu'min. I am explaining this to you. Now here, to change, that is, you will slowly, slowly crawl and get out of the filth, that is a different matter. So, this was the state of the ancestors of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, and the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam... Janaab-e Qusayy came, Janaab-e 'Abd Manaf came, after 'Abd Manaf came Janaab-e Hashim. And Janaab-e Hashim, when the ancestor of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam came, then after he came, the situation changed. That situation was the same as that of Mawlana Hunaid. I had told you that Janaab-e Hunaid entrusted those four lights—Nubuwwat and Risalat, Imamat and Wasa'it—he entrusted Nubuwwat and Risalat to Janaab-e Adam, and he gave Imamat and Wasa'it to his son. And this chain, continuing, came to Janaab-e Hud. Then Imamat and Wasa'it, in that same chain, continuing, came to Janaab-e Khuzaima. And from Khuzaima, continuing... And on the other side, the chain of Nubuwwat continued among his offspring, among the Anbiya. This was called Mustaqarr, that was called Mustawda'. This is the chain of the Mustawda'in, those of Nisbat-e-Adna, and those of Nisbat-e-'Ala, that is the chain of Mustaqarr. I hope you understand. These two chains are running parallel. The chain of Nubuwwat, there is no son after father there, there is nass. And Nubuwwat and Risalat, these are two things, consider them two lights, they are being carried forward. And this, Imamat and Wasa'it, this is the knowledge of the masters, and these are from above, they are the God of their time, and their light is continuing in its own place, and that chain is also continuing in its place. The first time these four lights combined was in Janaab-e Hunaid. And then from Hunaid, this chain split and divided into two parts. And when it reached Janaab-e Ibrahim, all four things came together. And Hazrat Ibrahim, who was the son of Janaab-e Salih, the Imam, when these four things came to him, he divided them between his two sons, Janaab-e Isma'il and Is-haq. Now this division, again coming together, where did it join? It joined at Janaab-e Hazrat Hashim. Jadd-e-Payghambar [ancestor of the Prophet], Hazrat Hashim 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, when it came and rested on him, it was joined. And what did Janaab-e Hashim do? He gave all four things to his son, Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib, salawatullah 'alayh, he entrusted them to you. And Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib, salawatullah 'alayh, he took charge of those four lights—Nubuwwat, Risalat... Nubuwwat and Wasa'it and Imamat. Now you see, to turn over the old pages of history is very difficult, but the incidents of Jadd-e-Payghambar, Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib, are so famous that you know Abraha had brought an army, and the Surah of "Alam tara kayfa fa'ala" was revealed, and you know that he wanted to demolish the Ka'bah. And who was its protector? The protector was Janaab-e Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib. Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib protected it and confronted this army. And when that elephant of Abraha came near, it, upon seeing the nur [light] of Imamat in his forehead, the animal prostrated. And at that time, you gave the call for the army to be destroyed, for the punishment of Allah Ta'ala to come. And so, Allah Ta'ala accepted your call and sent an army of ababil [swallows], and it dropped pebbles in such a way that they finished them off like bullets, and his entire army was destroyed. So all this... This, na'udhu billah, na'udhu billah [God forbid, God forbid], these were not worshippers of idols. The ancestors of the Rasul were... अरे, they came to uproot idols, to give guidance. And what need did they have to come here? अरे, they were people of the ta'amur [spiritual realm]. They only came for this reason, that they were assigned a service, that you have no release until you perform the service. Otherwise, what concern did they have to come with this earthly body? And as I have told you, in what manner did they come? They have worn clothes borrowed from us. They have taken bodies borrowed from us. Otherwise, where is their body? Where is their body? They are pure spirits. And this body, they have taken it from us, and we see our own selves. You see your own selves. When you see them, you see your own selves. So, in this way, they have been manifesting in the world, and these are those anwar [lights], they are pure light. All these personages, whose names I am taking before you, they are all pure light. And Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib salawatullah 'alayh, what did he do? He divided those four lights between his two sons. And the elder son, Mawlana Abu Talib salawatullah 'alayh, to him you entrusted the nur of Imamat and Wasa'it. And Nubuwwat and Risalat, you gave to your younger son, Mawlana 'Abdullah, who is the venerable father of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. To him you gave this nur. The smaller nur to the younger, the bigger nur to the elder. But this was a great wisdom. And Mawlana Abu Talib, he became the master of your Imamat and Wasa'it. And when Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib passed away, he made a will, and Mawlana Abu Talib salawatullah 'alayh established the governance of Imamat and Wasa'it, and you were the Rabb of the time, the God of the time, the Imam of the time, and you were everything. Whatever you were, you were it. Now, Mawlana Abu Talib 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam saw that now, in my time, this last Nabi is to be manifested. Mawlana Abu Talib salawatullah 'alayh, the Rabb of the time, saw that now that time has come when there will be a zuhur-e-qudsi [holy manifestation], the manifestation of that being, and that being will come into the world, whom I shall honor with Nubuwwat and Risalat, and who will beat the drum of Islam in all four corners of the world. Now, in this way, Janaab-e Abu Talib, you started preparing spiritually. And now, just as pens move and our emotions move, that this scene was unfolding, and the atmosphere was fragrant, and this state was occurring, and this was the world of the zuhur-e-qudsi, that the lake of Sawa dried up, and the battlements of Kisra's palace fell, and such and such things happened. Undoubtedly, thousands of such wonders happened in the world, and what do they know of this in the world? अरे, what a tremendous revolution came in the spiritual world, God knows best what kind of revolutions came when the blessed birth of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam took place here. Your... for the birth, Allah Ta'ala chose the month of Rabi' al-Awwal, and in it, the 12th date. You know that it is the Eid for the Suwaili community. And the coming of Sarwar-e-Kainaat into the world was no ordinary matter. Your zuhur-e-qudsi took place here. And as soon as you came into the world, Allah Ta'ala choosing this 12th date, there was a great wisdom behind it. The month of Rabi' al-Awwal, and especially this 12th date, and then the special thing is that the Prophet's birth, the Prophet's death, and the Prophet's first revelation were on the same day. Allah Ta'ala decreed it to be on a Monday. There is a great wisdom in this, and this miracle was only for Sarwar-e-Kainaat. This is a miracle just like the one for Sarwar-e-Kainaat, that Allah Ta'ala, although there were special qualities in all the A'immah, He did not manifest them. He only manifested them in the person of Sarwar-e-Kainaat. For example, one thing you know is that there was no bad smell of sweat. Mawla... Sarwar-e-Kainaat did not sweat, and you did not have such a bad smell, Allah Ta'ala saved you from it. The second thing is, no urine or feces. The third thing is that no phlegm etc. would form. Why were such things kept? I am telling you the reason for it, that our bodies, why do they become impure? Because we eat wrong things. Haram [forbidden] things come in. And many things... despite our trying to avoid them, despite avoiding for 11 months, that we will only eat halal things, we will not eat haram things, but in the month of Ramadan, we are made to fast. Why are we made to fast? We are made to fast for this reason, that even then, despite us eating halal and not eating haram, still many haram things come to us. And after coming, they do not leave. And to get them out, there is only this one month. Whether it comes in summer or winter, it is the month for filtering our bodies, and it will clean out, separating the clean from the unclean. Otherwise... and in the same way, as the Nabi has commanded, the Shari'ah has commanded, if you fast, it will do the cleaning. So just as this cleaning happens, these are pure and purified personages. For them, the question of having this body does not even arise. These are personages from there, from the ta'amur. And then what can be said of the personage of Sarwar-e-Kainaat. So what was the point of these things not being there? It means that in our bodies, what happens? I said that haram things come in. So what does that mean? It means Shaqq and Mutahir come, Musir and Mustakbir come, and they have to be expelled. They have to be removed from the body. So, just as this is a natural process for us, and through it... and then, moving away from nature, the Shari'ah also makes us do some things, by making us fast for a month and so on. Now, since their bodies are already pure, and they are formed from our lata'if [subtleties], so now it is obvious that in their bodies, such impure things, Shaqq, Mutahir, Musir, Mustakbir, cannot even enter. When they cannot enter, such things cannot happen. So this is a logical point, otherwise there is no question about it, but I am just saying that logically too, it is proven that these things do not happen. So, in any case, Sarwar-e-Kainaat being born on the 12th date was a special quality, and it was telling, it was meant to tell, that our Du'at 'alayhim al-salatu wa al-salam have indicated, and that is that now there are 12 majami' [collections] with you. Of those suwarat [forms] which I have described as haykal, haykal [structure, temple], of which every Imam has only one, here there were 12 hayakil. There were 12 hayakil with Sarwar-e-Kainaat, of which you were the bearer. And this 12th date of yours, it indicates this 12, that Sarwar-e-Kainaat was carrying those 12 hayakil. You saw? Now I want to say something about that, about the haykal, some spiritual points. And that is, that from Adam to this time, from Mawlana Hunaid up to Janaab-e Hashim and Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib, all the A'immah who came, they were A'immah, they were all called Mustaqarr. And all the Anbiya who came, all Anbiya, they were all called Mustawda'. The collections of these Mustawda'in, where did they gather? In between them, just as pillars are placed, and there are milestones, like those milestones, where did theirs happen? One, as I told you, was Mawlana Hunaid, and after that Janaab-e Hashim, and after that Janaab-e... and in between, Janaab-e Ibrahim. So these, Ibrahim and Hunaid and Hashim, you see that the letter 'ha' with two dots comes in them. The Du'at call this 'Thalatha Ha'. These three 'ha's, the first is Janaab-e Hunaid, then Ibrahim, then Hashim. These three 'ha's, Thalatha Ha, the collection of all of them, the Mustaqarr A'immah, this entire collection was gathered with whom? It was gathered with Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib, and whom did he give it to? To Mawlana Abu Talib. Mawlana Abu Talib was its master and master, and he kept that collection safe. What happened on this side? All the Anbiya, from Adam to this time, all of them gathered, and after gathering, where did they all gather? They came and gathered, all of them, with Mawlana 'Abdullah, the father of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. Here, with Janaab-e Abu Talib are the Mustaqarrin, here are the Mustawda'in. Now, what was the matter? It was the same that I have told you, and it is known to you openly, that after an Imam, there is an Imam. Now here, the law changed. Why? Because when the law changed in the ta'amur, the law changed here too. And the law... there was one exception, and that was for the venerable personage of Sarwar-e-Kainaat. And what was that? That after Hazrat Abu Talib, his son should be the Imam, and he was the Imam, and who was he? Hazrat Ali ibn Abi Talib 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. Your venerable personage was the Imam and was the heir to his father. He was the son of Hazrat Abu Talib, after him, he was his heir. On this side, the heir of Janaab-e 'Abdullah was the personage of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. But Abu Talib was seeing that my son cannot take it until this entire amanat [trust] is not given to Janaab-e Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. Why? Because the same form had been created. In the ta'amur, this form had been created, and the higher had bowed before the lower, and everyone had submitted to the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam and prostrated before him. It was necessary for the impression of this thing to be made in the world. For this reason, what did you do? Hazrat Abu Talib took care of him. See, now what happens in the world? अरे, they say the Prophet became an orphan, Hazrat Aminah also passed away, Janaab-e 'Abdullah also passed away, the orphan Nabi. Now who would take care of him? The uncle took him and raised him. अरे, you ignorant fools! And O un-understanding people and Muslims, don't you know in what way Mawlana Abu Talib took care of him? What kind of care was he giving to his son and to his nephew? अरे, he was Sarwar-e-Kainaat, whom it was his duty to protect. And he was doing it, considering it a duty. And he took care of him, and with what love and affection he raised you. And with great excellence, he took care of you. He never discriminated between his children and the Payghambar. There was never any difference between Ali and the Nabi in the hands of Mawlana Abu Talib. And he raised both of them. And for this reason, these two were the qamar and shams [moon and sun] that were to shine on the horizon of the da'wah. They were to shine on the horizon of the da'wah, and your eyes were seeing it. And you were seeing that my son is the rightful heir, but I cannot get it until these things are handed over to the Prophet. But when Janaab-e Abu Talib gave all this, then he said this, telling the Prophet, "O Nabi, you know, nephew, all these things belong to my son. He is its rightful heir, but he cannot get it until the time comes, then you hand it over to him. This is an amanat [trust] with you, for my son. This is my inheritance, which my son is to get. But he will not get it until you hand it over." But, "O son, what I am giving you through my brother, who is your father, that is Nubuwwat and Risalat, that is your inheritance, you take that." So, the Nabi-e-Karim, that first right, which was the inheritance from his father—every person takes the inheritance of his father first. Many special qualities come into him by birth and through life, but many things he also receives through inheritance. So in the same way, the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam received those things from his father, from Mawlana 'Abdullah, he had acquired them. He took those things. And with that, you also acquired Nubuwwat and Risalat. Now it happened that the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa... Allah Ta'ala, in this universe, "lan tajida fi sunnati Allahi tabdila" (you will never find in the way of Allah any change), Allah Ta'ala says in the Holy Qur'an, that you will not see any change in the way of God in this world. Everything will continue on its course, and there will be no difference in it. So, just as a child goes to school, studies, grows up, becomes wise, and has to learn everything, in the same way, all these A'immah had to learn. Although they were from there, they had to learn. Whether it was Nubuwwat or Risalat or Imamat or Wasa'it, they had to do everything. In the same way, it happened for Sarwar-e-Kainaat, Fakhr-e-Mawjudat. That these ignorant Muslims think that the Nabi, na'udhu billah, na'udhu billah, was ignorant, and he had not learned to read or write. अरे, the teacher of the entire world, and he is ignorant? They say that this is the very kamal [perfection] of the Prophet, that he became the teacher of the entire world, but Allah taught him. अरे, if Allah taught him directly through inspiration, then what was the Prophet's own acquisition? While they praise the Prophet, on the other hand, they also establish this. If it was direct inspiration, you yourself be the judge, that when Allah is giving everything, then what was the Prophet's own acquisition? What did he achieve? So, we say that the Prophet's acquisition was first, then Allah gave. And if everything was there... अरे भाई, everything was there, in the ta'amur. There was nothing here. Now it happened that how did the Lord of the worlds give, and in what way did you acquire education? It is an incident. And that great incident is to be understood, that the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, from the beginning, when you were a child, from childhood itself you were called Sadiq and Amin [the truthful and the trustworthy]. Why were you called that? अरे, was he an ordinary personality? And what kind of personality was he, you are not aware. They are people of the ta'amur. These are people from there. They are people of Nisbat-e-'Ala and Nisbat-e-Adna. They are the ones who combine Nubuwwat and mi'raj in themselves. Why wouldn't they be called that? So, in any case, he was being called Sadiq and Amin, and time was passing. Although in the early part of your life, you did not possess this thing, but it was God's will that 40 years should pass, and after that, you were honored with Nubuwwat. And when you were given Nubuwwat, at that time, your state was such that until that time, it is said that your method was that you would always go to the cave of Hira'. And that cave of Hira' is still revered today, and people go for ziyarat [pilgrimage], thinking that it was the place of Sarwar-e-Kainaat. And all these Muslims narrate that you used to go there and stay in meditation. Neither in Islam is there muraqabah [meditation], nor dhikr [remembrance], nor that covering oneself, nor khalwat [seclusion], nor chilla [40-day retreat], nor this, nor that. None of it. All these are nonsensical things. These are all wrong things. There is nothing. Dhikr-e-Ilahi is a separate thing altogether. And the 'ibadat [worship] that we perform, that very 'ibadat was what the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam used to perform. The thing that you did, the same thing you established for us. There was nothing besides it. All these are our things, that read this one lakh times, read that two lakh times, this is Ayat-e-Tehrima. अरे, every verse of the Holy Qur'an is Tehrima. It is not that some verse is Tehrima and some is not, and by reading only that our salvation will happen. This is all wrong. The whole of the Holy Qur'an is the essence. So, in any case, the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam used to go to the cave of Hira', and there in the cave of Hira', he used to worship. It's not like he was doing it for worship; there were mosques and so on. But the reason for going to the cave of Hira' was this, that you were still in a state of satr [concealment], in a state of secrecy, and your teachers, they would teach you there in a hidden state. And who were those teachers? Who were the teachers of the Payghawar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam? First of all, the one who was your teacher, it was he whose name is Mawlana Ubayy ibn Ka'b. Who is your very great companion, whose name is Mawlana Ubayy ibn Ka'b, and whom they call Umm-e-Ruhani [spiritual mother], your spiritual mother. The same one we call the teacher of the Prophet. That the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, the wasi he made, the one he established after himself, in the rank of Nubuwwat, it was him he established. अरे, where are you calling Ali the wasi? Ali became the wasi, and he progressed in his place, and this one progressed in his place. Now, where will you stop this one, and where will you stop that one? But in the rank of Nubuwwat, the wasi he made was Janaab-e Ubayy ibn Ka'b. This is why his holy grave is in Sham [Syria], and when I went there, and in the blessed rawdah [shrine], when I entered, I instinctively, saying "Assalamu 'alayka ya Rasul Allah" (Peace be upon you, O Messenger of Allah), entered. The attendant there grabbed me and started saying, "Whom are you greeting? This is not the grave of Rasulullah." So I said, "Brother, you do not have ma'rifat [gnosis]. Forgive me, you don't know anything. And I know very well that this is the grave of Rasulullah." So, in any case, this is a matter of ma'rifat. So, Mawlana Ubayy ibn Ka'b, he was the spiritual mother, the teacher of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, and the true wasi who came was the Prophet's, Janaab-e Ubayy ibn Ka'b. So, the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, at the time when he acquired knowledge from you, he sat before him as a student and acquired knowledge. Janaab-e Ubayy, like a compassionate mother... just as a mother's lap is the first school for a child, in the same way, he kept teaching and training you. And when your education there was complete, then after Ubayy, the second one who taught was the slave of Mawlatana Khadija, Maysara. Maysara used to teach the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. This Mawlana Maysara was the second. This was the era of 'Isa, and these were the very last people of the era of 'Isa 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, and they were upholding that era, and they were bound by that same shari'ah. But they knew that a zuhur-e-qudsi was happening and this very Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam was going to manifest as a Nabi. Knowledge had been given to them. And all this was being carried out under whose command? It was under the command of Mawlana Abu Talib. Nothing, not even a leaf, could move in that era, and in the entire Islamic world, not a leaf moved, not a speck or a pebble moved, except by the command of Mawlana Abu Talib. Now you can imagine that this Mawla-e-Kainaat, the owner, Mawlana Abu Talib, who is the greatest and most venerable Imam, who is the God of the time, him the Muslims, alas, call a kafir [disbeliever]. Na'udhu billah, na'udhu billah. To call him a kafir... the one who says it is himself a kafir, na'udhu billah. Such a personage, who is the Imam of the Imams, who is giving Risalat to the Rasul, who is revealing the anwar-e-zikriya, the Qur'an, sending it, who is doing everything, the one who establishes the Shari'ah, the enforcer, the one who brings Islam, the giver, the explainer, the one who does everything is he. And to him... अरे, let the Muslims answer me this: can a mushrik [polytheist] perform the nikah [marriage] of a Muslim? If a mushrik performs the nikah of a Muslim, will it be valid? It cannot be valid. So now you tell me, you can sift through all the books of the entire Islamic world, that Hazrat Abu Talib performed the nikah of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. When your uncle performed the Prophet's nikah, just look at the hamd [praise of God] in it. Look at its khutbah [sermon]. In what manner was the khutbah given and the hamd done, and the Prophet... and Allah was praised. So all this you... he stated in the khutbah. So was the one who praises God and extols Him, na'udhu billah, was he a kafir? No, no, these were hidden matters, secret matters. These were things that could not be revealed. Why could they not be revealed? Just as you cannot answer me, why did Allah Ta'ala not make the sun shine always? Why did He make night? Then you... you will say, no, there is great wisdom, brother, it is necessary, otherwise if there were no night, we could not even rest. It would be a great problem. Let it be, it is good. If Allah Ta'ala made this system, it would be a problem. So in the same way, the hiding of the Imams and the manifestation of the Imams also happened. So this was Hazrat Abu Talib, who was explaining and giving everything. So by his command, Mawlana Abu... Ubayy ibn Ka'b first taught, and after that, Janaab-e Maysara, who was the slave of Janaab-e Khadija, he taught. And after Janaab-e Maysara, a venerable man named Zayd, he... he taught. And the third, when this was done, then the fourth one who came was Janaab-e Buheira the monk. What can be said of Buheira the monk, what praise can I give him? That I cannot understand which words to find, what his personality was, and what his generosity was, and what his perfections were. My tongue is unable to describe Mawlana Buheira the monk. He is the same monk who, on the journey to Sham, a monk saw the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam and saw the nur of Nubuwwat in his forehead and invited him, and the incidents are well-known and you can read them in history, and have read them. So, in any case, all those incidents are about that same monk, this is the same Buheira the monk. And he was a very great scholar. He was taking care of Hazrat 'Isa 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. He was the treasurer of all the treasures of Nubuwwat. And he had become the right-hand man of Hazrat Abu Talib 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. Buheira the monk, as the fourth one, gave education to the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. And when the education was complete, then the fifth teacher who came for the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam was your own wife, Mawlatana Khadija al-Kubra, salawatullah 'alayha. You were the one who gave the teaching. अरे, the stories are famous in the world that Janaab-e Khadija had great wealth, she gave wealth to the Payghambar, and he went to trade with it. अरे, that wealth, along with this outward wealth, it meant that inner wealth. And Janaab-e Khadija was bestowing that knowledge. She was giving that knowledge because you... she wanted to establish him in Nubuwwat and Risalat, and she had given it. So, the fifth teacher was Mawlatana Khadija. It was your wife, she herself was the teacher. So you saw that these are the five teachers. That is why the decisive statement of the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam is present even today, and what is it? "Akhadhtu min khamsah, addaytu ila khamsah, wa bayni wa bayna al-rabbi khamsah." (I took from five, I gave to five, and between me and the Lord are five). I have taken from five, I have given to five, and between me and God there are five. This is a riddle that the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam stated, and they could not solve it. And what is its reality? Taking from five, these are the five teachers of the Prophet. First, as I told you, you will remember the name, he is Janaab-e Ubayy ibn Ka'b. After that is Maysara. After that is Zayd. After that is Buheira the monk. And in the end is Janaab-e Khadija al-Kubra. So these are the five teachers of the Prophet from whom he had taken. The five to whom he gave, they are Ali al-Murtada, and Fatima al-Zahra, and Hasan al-Mujtaba, and Husayn Sayyid al-Shuhada of Karbala, and Mawlatana Khadija herself. The one from whom you, who had given you education, now she herself was acquiring education from you at one point. It happens. Sometimes the teacher becomes the student and the student the teacher, we have seen this happen in the world. And when the Prophet had acquired knowledge, now you became the giver. So, in any case, not only did you become the giver, but your revered wife also became yours. So, in any case, this taking and giving happened. Now, the five between you and God, who are they? They are the Lawh and Qalam [Tablet and Pen], that is, the First Intellect and the Second Intellect. And after that, Jibril and Mika'il and Israfil. You have indicated towards this. And these are those spiritual personages about whom the Prophet said that these five are between me and God. So, in any case, whatever came to the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, it was coming through this chain. But I have one point to make before you and I am leaving it in brief, and that is that among all these personages, three personages are very special. And those personages are such that these entire collections which were to be gathered with Amir al-Mu'minin, they came to Mawlana Abu Talib, and from there they came to Janaab-e Payghambar as an amanat [trust]. And those which were to come to Janaab-e 'Abdullah, all those of the Anbiya came, and Janaab-e 'Abdullah gave them to Janaab-e Payghambar, and he took them in the capacity of Mustaqarr. But in all of this, three were not included. Three did not come, because they were of a very high rank, and nature did not want that they should go to either Ali or the Nabi. And who were those three? They were Mawlana Abu Talib, and Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib, and Janaab-e Mawlana Hashim. They are called... Janaab-e 'Abdullah, Janaab-e Abu Talib and Janaab-e 'Abd al-Muttalib. They are called Jibril, Mika'il, Israfil, or you can call them sufara' [ambassadors]. Sufara'-e-Kiram, these are... from Allah's side, they are called sufara', and the rank of these sufara' is very high. And Allah Ta'ala has protected them. In any case, when the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, this was the state, and you saw that in the circumstances of his childhood, and when you were honored with Nubuwwat, then after becoming a Nabi, the first thing you did was, from the peaks of Faran, you called out, you said to bring Islam, to say "Qulu la ilaha illa Allah" (Say there is no god but Allah). All that happened. After that, you ordered all your relatives to be gathered. When it happened, you said, "Wa andhir 'ashirataka al-aqrabin" (And warn your nearest kindred), when this verse was revealed, that O Rasul, you should warn your relatives. अरे, charity begins from home. The whole movement was to start from home, Islam was to spread. You gathered your relatives. The famous incident of milk and roasted meat. And after that, you know that you asked all of them, "Is there anyone in this mission of mine, in spreading this Islam, who is ready to be my helper?" So, except for Ali raising his little hands and saying, "O Rasulullah, I am your helper, and I am your supporter and helper," no one else... But the reality is that the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam said at that very moment, "You are my wasi, you are my wazir, you are my sharik [partner]." He said it in the same way as Musa had said for Janaab-e Harun. So, in any case, Muslims object that the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam... the first to become Muslim were Janaab-e Abu Bakr and Janaab-e Khadija. This is wrong. Even they agree that the first to become Muslim was Janaab-e Ali. But they say that Ali's Islam is not accepted for this reason, that he was a small child. So we give them this answer, that such a small matter, and it doesn't enter your minds. अरे, if Ali was a child and was small and was not bringing Islam with understanding, according to you this was the case, then O fools, O un-understanding people, and just understand for God's sake, that the Prophet was not a child. अरे, the Prophet was not a child. How did the Prophet accept the Islam of Ali? So there are not one, but thousands of proofs. With which proof can they be convinced? But those who are not willing to believe, who are insistent and arrogant, they will not leave their insistence. Those who are shaqq and mutahir, they will not leave their doubt. It is Allah who gives guidance to whom He wills. So, in any case, the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, as soon as he gave this guidance, he performed the nass of wasa'it on Ali 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam. And what kind of nass was it? It was a nass-e-khafi [hidden designation]. After this, many opportunities came. What kind of opportunities? The occasion of the Hijrat [migration], the occasion of delivering the Surah Bara'at, the occasion of breaking the idols in the Ka'bah, the occasion of breaking the idols. How many occasions were there? Wherever an ayat was revealed and you said, "Wa 'tasimu bi-habli Allahi jami'an" (And hold firmly to the rope of Allah all together). You, holding the rope of Allah firmly, you placed your hand on Ali's head. People asked, "O Rasulullah, where is the rope of Allah?" You placed your hand on Ali's head and said, "This and his progeny is the rope." So in this way, you performed nass-e-khafi your whole life, Prophet. At every turn, at every step, in every battle, in every gathering, in every war. There is no war, by God, which Amir al-Mu'minin did not resolve. You did not finish it. अरे, why wouldn't he? Because Ali and the Prophet were not separate. That is why the Prophet stated it clearly and definitively, and that statement is still present today, that all the Imams... Imam Hanbal, Imam Malik, etc., all have also written it, that the Prophet said, "Ana wa 'Ali min nurin wahid" (I and Ali are from one light). The Buraq, that was in fact... you think that some Buraq was brought, some horse was brought, on which the Prophet rode and went on the mi'raj. Na'udhu billah. You are understanding the scholarly points. You are looking at it from a scholarly perspective, understanding the spiritual aspect. Such things are not here. That Buraq, what is it? It is the rihiyat [spiritual winds/vehicles] of the Prophet, with which you ascended to the celestial sphere. And that Rafraf, which is, it is faster than that, and that is your Surat-e-Sharif [noble form], with which you took flight to that ta'amur and went there. And from there, after observing the scene, you returned. So this was your mi'raj, and this was the elevation. This was your physical and spiritual mi'raj. So, in any case, physical is in terms of the rihiyat, from which the body is formed. And spiritual is in terms of that surat. So now you understand how the physical and spiritual mi'raj of the Prophet was. So, what happened in the end? The Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, what Mawlana Abu Talib had kept with you as an amanat [trust], this was a very big treasure, a very big treasure that was kept as an amanat. The summary of the da'wahs of all the A'immah, all those hayakil, countless hayakil, those that were there, you... the Nubuwwat and Risalat which you had given to Janaab-e 'Abdullah, those you received permanently, because you were the Nabi. But those amanats which you received of Imamat and Wasa'it, which was the right of Janaab-e Ali, but you said that Ali will not take it as long as you are present. In the universe, the mercy for all worlds, your presence is there, until then it cannot be. For this reason, you held all those things in the capacity of an amanat, and it is called kifalat-e-kubra [the great guardianship]. And this was the state of kifalat-e-kubra, that you are teaching Janaab-e Ali, you are showing him, you are making him read, and Ali is learning, reading, understanding. At every step, the one teaching and explaining to Ali was the Prophet. And for this reason, what did Janaab-e Ali say? "Allamani Rasulullah alfa babin min al-hikmah, wa fataha li min kulli babin alfa bab." (The Messenger of Allah taught me a thousand chapters of wisdom, and from each chapter he opened for me a thousand chapters). That the Prophet opened for me a thousand doors of knowledge, and from every door, a thousand doors opened for me. So all these things, the Prophet was telling and opening up. And he would say, "Look..." And Janaab-e Ali would say, "Look, whatever I acquire, I acquire from the Prophet." And indeed, you acquired it from the Prophet. So in this way, the life of the Prophet was passing, but the need was for a nass-e-jali [open designation] to also take place. And the opportunity for a nass-e-jali came. And you had a chance to say it openly and clearly. You... people... as we understand it here, that one written word is worth a hundred spoken ones. So why would the Prophet hesitate to write? You wanted to write during your illness, but Janaab-e 'Umar stopped you, saying, na'udhu billah, na'udhu billah, the Prophet is delirious. And all these are present in all the histories. You can pick up any book and see. So, he said that he stopped the Prophet. And the Prophet wanted to write about Janaab-e Ali, that matter which he had been saying his whole life, he wanted to put it in writing too. Well, it could not be put in writing. But at the time of your passing, when you performed the Hajjat al-Wida' [Farewell Hajj], when you sacrificed, you slaughtered 63 camels, and the rest you had Janaab-e Ali slaughter. And when you reached the place of Ghadir Khumm, you stopped the crowd of two lakh people. And after stopping them, a pulpit was made, and you ascended the pulpit. And after ascending, you said, "Alastu awla bikum min anfusikum?" (Am I not more worthy of you than your own selves?). "Are you not... am I not superior to your lives, O people?" They all said, "Qalu bala ya Rasul Allah" (They said, "Yes indeed, O Messenger of Allah"). They said, "Indeed, O Rasul, you are more worthy than our lives, fida'uka ummi wa abi [may my mother and father be sacrificed for you]." When you had taken this statement, then you said, "Listen, and I say, and that is, 'Man kuntu mawlahu fa-hadha 'Aliyyun mawlahu'" (Of whomsoever I am the master, this Ali is his master). "अरे, of whom I was the owner, of which amanat I was carrying, from today Ali is its owner." This is what he was saying. To this day, Muslims have not understood, to this day, Shias have not understood. No one has understood this point. Except for us Sulaymanis, no one knows this point. And that is exactly it. अरे, "Of whose amanat I was the custodian, Ali is its master." "Man kuntu mawlahu fa-hadha 'Aliyyun mawlahu," "I am your... Ali is its master." And you entrusted all those things. And at that very moment, you handed them over. In this way, Amir al-Mu'minin... and at that very moment, people came and said, "Bakhin bakhin ya ibn Abi Talib" (Congratulations, O son of Abu Talib), and paid allegiance to Janaab-e Ali. But the hypocrisy continued in the same way, and the circumstances of Janaab-e Ali you will hear in detail. But these things all happened, and the Payghambar 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, because it was the occasion of the Hajjat al-Wida', and now you... the time was coming, and Allah Ta'ala was also eager for your meeting. It was a state of "radiyatan mardiyyah" (well-pleased and well-pleasing). Allah Ta'ala was also pleased and you were also pleased. He also wanted it and you also wanted it. And that time had come. And the Surah "Idha ja'a" had been revealed, and the Prophet had said that now it is time for my رحلت [departure]. Thus, at the time of his رحلت as well, Ali was by his side. The last breath of the Prophet, who was the one to touch it? It was Ali. That last breath, which all Muslims narrate and all Shias write in their books, it was not the last breath. In reality, they were the anwar [lights] that remained with the Prophet, a few anwar, which nature wanted to remain. The Prophet gave those anwar too at the time of his passing. And still, some remained. And when you gave the order to give the ghusl [ritual washing], that, "Ali, you will give me the ghusl," and when you gave the ghusl to the Prophet, at that time, some water remained in the eyes of the Prophet. You bent down and drank that water. And this was the last portion that you took from the eyes of the Prophet. And still, some anwar remained. And what happened was that when you were being lowered into the grave, the Prophet 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam, for burial, at that time, someone dropped his ring into the grave and started saying, "My ring has fallen, let me take it out." He wanted to gain virtue in this way. Mawla-e-Kainaat stopped him and said, "Be careful, no one will go down. I will go down, and I will take out your ring." And you went down, ostensibly you took out the ring, but you took that last portion from there as well. This was the last thing that you received from the Prophet, from that pure grave. And in this way, the Prophet 'alayhi al-salatu wa al-salam departed from the world. But all these are pure light. Their coming to and going from the world, you all know, this is all related to the ta'amur. There are no states from here. And outwardly, such things happened here, that the passing of the Prophet was a great tragedy. There was a great commotion in the Ahl al-Bayt. And Amir al-Mu'minin became your wasi. But on the other side, Mawla-e-Kainaat had been appointed as the authority over the wasa'it in every respect, but the world turned its back on you, and the world had turned away from you. In any case, upon that unlettered, Qurayshi, Arab Nabi, for whom fida'uka ummi wa abi, who acquainted us with true Islam and true iman, and who provided the means for the development of our souls, may millions of blessings and peace of Allah be upon him, and may the mercies and blessings of Allah be upon him, and may all of us who seek his intercession benefit from his mercy. Wa akhiru da'wana an al-hamdu lillahi rabb al-'alamin, wa al-salatu wa al-salamu 'ala rasulihi sayyidina Muhammadin wa ahli baytihi al-tayyibin al-tahirin, wa sallama 'alayhim ajma'in.
