A'immah Mustaqarrin or A'immah Mustawda'in... I had explained the silsilah. And that silsilah, from the Qayamat-i A'zam... I, passing through all the periods, from the Qayamat-i A'zam, had started the silsilah. And first, in the daur-i kashf, the daur-i satr, and at the completion of the daur-i satr, I told you that from the Panjatan-i Pak, how imamah and mustawda'iyyat came to them, and in all ages, for every age, as Allah Ta'ala has said, `wa li-kulli qawmin had` (and for every people there is a guide), for every age, there is a guide, a giver of guidance. In every age, a giver of guidance continued to be established, and the A'immah Mustaqarrin were also established by the will of the Maula, and the A'immah Mustawda'in as well. But these silsilahs, they went up to the Payghambar, alaihis-salatu was-salam, and there the nabuwwah ended. And from there, the da'wah began, and that name was changed, and the name of the da'i started to be used. And the hujjat and the du'at began to serve, and the A'immah Kiram were established in their places. And I told you that our 21st Imam, after him, the silsilah of the du'at continued. And I have explained in detail before you regarding that silsilah. But why did Allah Ta'ala keep this silsilah of hidayah in the world at all? What was the need for Allah Ta'ala to have this silsilah of hidayah? You will say that people were gumrah, and they needed hidayah, otherwise what would we have understood? We would not have understood what is halal and what is haram. We wouldn't have understood anything. Because you people know, that's why you understand that because we said labbayk in the other world, we showed nadamah, so here too we showed nadamah, and those who called us, called us, and we accepted. But what needs to be seen is that when the givers of hidayah gave hidayah, did those who were to take hidayah take it? This is the question. The givers of hidayah gave hidayah, and did those who were to take hidayah take it? It doesn't seem so. So, the world remained gumrah. So what does this mean? It means that either, nauzubillah, the givers of hidayah had some deficiency in their hidayah, or they did not guide properly, or they did not give hidayah at all. And those who were to take hidayah, they could not take that hidayah. Meaning, they did not truly take hidayah. The matter is actually that the givers of hidayah, as you have been hearing all the accounts, the givers of hidayah left no stone unturned. They did the royal Imamah from a straw mat. The heavenly kingdom was in their hands. Even if they did not have the apparent khilafah, it did not matter. But they were doing the royal Imamah from the mat, and they were the carriers of the spiritual Imamah, and they consistently, all those things, those points, which I am now explaining before you, a thousand times more was their language, their substance. The anwar-i zakiriyyah descended upon them, the Quran was revealed in their house. They were explaining it and making it understood very well. There was nothing that was not made understandable. But why, then, did that teaching fail? Why did that teaching fail? The matter is actually this: that from their teaching, hidayah was indeed given, but those who did not take hidayah, who turned away from their teaching, only they did not attain hidayah. The clear, logical conclusion is this: that from their teaching, hidayah was being given, but they did not want to take hidayah, and they did not take hidayah. And for this reason, even today, what is it? Do you think that, "Alright, a truth has been revealed, a fact has become known, so we will all accept it"? No. Human nature is of such a kind that it does not accept every truth. It does not take every goodness. It accepts what its heart desires. You understand about namaz, roza, etc., so do you all accept it? You don't accept it. You do it when you want, and when you don't want, you don't do it. So, in the same way, those people, despite being guided, wanted to turn their faces away, so they turned them away. Although you were seeing that it was 'Ali himself, Maula-i Ka'inat himself, who was giving the tafsir of the Quran, solving problems, he was the hallal-i mushkilat. All things... you did it in every khilafah. You did all the work. You compiled the Quran, you told the verses of the Quran, you did its translation, you gave the answers to questions. If this were not so, then Janab-i 'Umar would not have said, `law la 'aliyyul lahalaka 'umar` (Had it not been for 'Ali, 'Umar would have perished). Had it not been for 'Ali, 'Umar would have perished. He would not have said that `'ajzat an-nisa an talidna mithla 'aliyy-ibn-abi-talib` (Women are incapable of giving birth to the like of 'Ali ibn Abi Talib), that women are incapable of giving birth to a person like 'Ali ibn Abi Talib. He confessed. And Janab-i Abu Bakr also did the same. So these ashab, they were from the time of Sayyidna 'Isa. These two, they were from the time of Sayyidna 'Isa, and it was their great desire to become a rasul. It was their great desire to attain the station of the Payghambar, alaihis-salatu was-salam, and they were among his hujjats, among the companions of Sayyidna 'Isa, with Buhayra al-Rahib, and among his companions. But it was their great desire... this is not about Janab-i 'Uthman... these were two. But, despite that, what happened? When they saw that the prophethood of the Prophet could not be attained, and the risalah that you have attained this virtue, they saw that, "Alright, if not this, then at least let's get the wasayah." So anyway, what I am saying to you is that we wanted to remain gumrah, so we remained gumrah. Allah did not want to keep us gumrah. He wanted to give hidayah, and He gives hidayah, and for every qaum, He sends a giver of hidayah. But we did not take hidayah, that is our fault. So, in any case, what needs to be seen is that... in the context of hidayah, the biggest question that comes up is that of qismat and of our taqdir. Now, in this matter, you see that in this whole world, there is no nasl, no color, no qaum, and no place, no [unclear] that does not believe in qismat. Everyone is a believer in qismat. Everyone believes in qismat, that yes, there is qismat, there is qismat. "It was written in our qismat like this," "It is like this in our qismat." Very few, perhaps a handful, will be there who do not believe, but everyone believes that there is qismat, and there is. But what is it? That not everyone relies on qismat. Unfortunately, if anyone does, it's the Muslims. Unfortunately, if there is any qaum in the world that relies on qismat, it is the Muslims. They completely rely on qismat and sit back. And what is the proof of that? That Muslims rely on qismat and are sitting back? If you look, you will find out that Muslims have relied on qismat in such a way that they have placed all responsibility on Allah. That's why they rely on it. They have placed it on Allah, that the source of everything, everything comes from His side. You see, you grab any Muslim and ask, "Well, whatever Allah Ta'ala wills... Whatever Allah Ta'ala commands... Whatever Miyan does..." He who does, Miyan who does... "Brother, this Miyan and Allah, etc., fine, you can call them by these loving names, but what does He do and how does He do it? Do you also do something or not?" "We... we do nothing... Miyan who is the doer, He is the doer, He does it." "Alright, this Miyan does it, Allah does it. So then, how is this?" When they saw that this has now become an internationally accepted principle of ours, they included it in their kalimah tayyibah: `al-khayru washarru min Allahi Ta'ala` (Good and evil are from God Almighty). Good and evil, whatever there is... there are two things... two things... goodness and evil, virtue and vice. There were two things. They said, "Alright, put the responsibility for all things on Allah's shoulders, and we will be saved from everything, that's the best." So on Allah's shoulders... one on the shoulder, nauzubillah, nauzubillah, they put virtue, and on the other, they put vice. They started saying that whatever comes, it all comes from Allah's side. "Brother, if evil comes, it's from Allah's side. If good comes, it's also from Allah's side." Fine, goodness we understand, He is the source of good, but how can this evil be from Him? So now let me ask them a question: "Brother, you... Allah Ta'ala has said this, has He not, that, `A'udhu billahi minash shaytanir rajim` (I seek refuge in Allah from the accursed Satan). Allah Ta'ala says `fasta'idh billah` (seek refuge in Allah), that you should seek refuge from Shaytan, fear his waswasah, and keep yourself in refuge from his whisperings." Has Allah Ta'ala said this or not? "Yes, of course, He has said it, sir. How can you say that? I see it in the Holy Quran everywhere." "So what do you see?" "I see the name on every page, sir. The name of Shaytan al-Rajim is on every page." "Brother, on one page there isn't just one name, but the name of Shaytan is there four or five times." A person was so vexed by this that he erased Shaytan's name. He said, "Four or five names of Shaytan on one page? It would have been better if my forefathers' names were there." He erased the names and wrote his forefathers' names. So now... what can be done? They will be Pathans like that. So anyway, now... Shaytan... when I ask, "Brother, Allah Ta'ala has told you to take refuge from Shaytan, to fear his whisperings, `A'udhu billahi minash shaytanir rajim`... `A'udhu billahi minash shaytanir rajim`... Brother, wherever you are doing a good deed, you are reading it. Wherever there is the command of `fasta'idh billah`, you are following the command." "Brother, what is the need to follow the command? The short answer to this question is, why did Allah Ta'ala create Shaytan in the first place?" Now they are startled. "Sir, how can you... you are challenging the power of Allah Ta'ala." "Sir, I am asking a short question: why did Khuda create Shaytan? If He hadn't created him, this evil wouldn't have come. If the evil hadn't come, we wouldn't have done it, and if we hadn't done it, we wouldn't have been caught. There you go. A clear, logical conclusion. We would not have committed any evil, and the matter would have been settled. So, the fact that Allah Ta'ala created Shaytan became the biggest evil, and because of it, all the problems have arisen." So when Shaytan's existence itself is a [unclear], then the matter is actually that they cannot even comprehend that we have created Shaytan. "He does the evil deed himself and curses Shaytan," it's like that. We have been the cause of Shaytan's existence. And it happened there, as you heard in the original matters, how 'shaytaniyat' came into being and how 'shaytaniyat' proceeded. It's not that Allah Ta'ala, God forbid, created someone as Shaytan, or we named someone Shaytan. There, whoever did what kind of work, that's what happened. Rahman became one of Rahmaniyat, Shaytan became one of Shaytaniyat. Whoever did what kind of work, that was their state. So, fine, this evil was created. So now, the Muslims who say such things, now for that, you should ponder a little: that to attribute every good and every evil to Allah's side, how far is this a correct statement? The matter comes down to this: that the Lord of the worlds, in the Holy Quran, where He has said, there... did He not give us the ability to act in this 'abode of action'? Did He not say that this is the 'abode of action', here you should strive and act, you should try? Look, there is Jannah and there is Jahannam. If you do good work, you will go to Jannah. If you do bad work, you will go to Jahannam. If there were no Jannah and no Jahannam, no goodness and no evil, no afkar and no akhlaq would remain, nothing would remain. When you rely on qismat like this, then nothing will remain. Nothing will last. So then, Allah Ta'ala's saying, you see, in the Holy Quran, where Muslims pin everything on Allah, then why did the Lord of the worlds say this in the Holy Quran: `lay salil insani illa ma sa'a` (And that man can have nothing but what he strives for). That for man there is nothing except what he has strived for. Now, a moment of thought... they fell into thought, why did Allah Ta'ala say that `lay salil insani illa ma sa'a`. Then Allah Ta'ala also says, `dhalika taqdirul 'azeezil 'alim` (That is the decree of the Exalted in Might, the All-Knowing), that these are the decrees of Allah Ta'ala. There can be no questioning of the decrees. Whatever Allah Ta'ala wills, He does. These are matters of His taqdir. So if these are matters of taqdir, and this is so, then it means there is both jabar and qadr. It means there is qismat and also some matters of ikhtiyar. And so this dual state, how is it? It is not understood. And what will Muslims understand? They don't even want to take hidayah. They cut the connection right there, they got lost at the very door. They got lost from the door of 'ilm-i nabi, they turned their faces away from 'Ali himself. So now... their hallal-i mushkilat was you yourself. The solver of every matter was you yourself. The Nabi was the one who told the word, 'Ali was the one who told the meaning. The work of tanzil was his, the work of ta'wil was his. So when they turned their faces away from there, then every problem remained unsolved, just as it remained unresolved, in the same way, this problem was also not solved. And it remained that way. And now Muslims are not able to answer. And they said that the best thing is to turn everything over to Allah, that is much better. Why does the issue of giving an answer even arise? So it's obvious that who will ask a question when everything has been turned over to Allah? Then the question doesn't even arise. So then we will ask them this very question: what is the status of Jannah and Dozakh? Then what is the status of good and evil? What is the matter of this good deed and bad deed? What are jabar and qadr? Look, this was the only thing Muslims had, that one lie forces one to tell a hundred lies. One evil brought out a hundred evils. And what evils were born? They said that Allah Ta'ala had said that `ma khalaqtul jinna wal-insa illa li-ya'budun` (I did not create the jinn and mankind except to worship Me). We did not create humans and jinn except for 'ibadah. He created them for 'ibadah. So 'ibadah, it is known, is the ultimate purpose of the Creator, and it is the cause of creation. When the cause of creation is 'ibadah, then fine, it is the best of deeds, it is the head of deeds, the first thing is namaz... everything is there. Fine. Namaz... for namaz, the Prophet and Allah Ta'ala have said that you should pray in jama'ah, `yadullahi 'alal jama'ah` (The hand of Allah is with the congregation), if you pray in jama'ah you will get more reward and it will be greater. Fine, they sat down to pray in jama'ah. Now, when they sat down to pray, what did they do? They decided that when good and evil are from Allah himself, then what right do we have to look into anyone's evil or good? We should just grab a man's hand and put him in front and say, "Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim, you go ahead, you are the pesh-imam, I am your muqtadi." There, it's done. And this is the principle they have: that `sallu khalfa kulli birrin wa fajir` (Pray behind every righteous and sinful person). Every righteous and sinful person... meaning, no matter how sinful, how impious, how deceitful, how lying, how corrupt in the world a person is, you put that person in front, your intention is with him, your intention is with you. Allahu Akbar, I am making the intention with this imam. Then how are you making the intention with the imam? When this is your state, then how did you pray behind a fajir? So this was the principle, that in da'wah, we got the principle of making a mulla, and besides them, we cannot pray behind anyone else. When the elder sees that they are so much prepared, then they are appointed. And this system of da'wah is continuing from 'adam ta 'aynum. It will continue consistently and will always remain. And this is by permission, bi-idhn, bi-idhn. It will always be by permission, always by command. So this thing will also be by command. It won't be like you can pray behind anyone and everyone. So no. So it is known that, see, a flaw entered into a thing like namaz. A flaw entered into the thoughts. A flaw entered into the principles of Islam, a flaw entered into Islam, a flaw entered into us, and the Muslim did not stay on the path, did not walk on the straight path. Now, how to get them out of this misguidance? The matter is actually this: that because they did not accept the falsafah of the Ahl al-Bayt, they did not take correct 'ilm from 'Amir al-Mu'minin, the essence of the anwar-i zakiriyyah of the Holy Quran did not come to them, so obviously, what would they understand and what would come to them? So all those truths remained hidden from them, and they are just walking on a path, just some empty, hollow words are going on, and they are playing with these words. About Ka'batullah, they are writing essays that the wind is blowing this way, and there is such delicacy in it, such magic, and it is like this, and that... the atmospheres are being described, and all things are being described. A certain poignancy is being created with words, and... there is no truth. Take any subject. Is there any truth in it? That why was this made at all? Why was this done? Why was this flown? Why was it to stop at the miqat? Why this tawaf? Why that? There is no answer to 'why'. So the matter is not like that. Islam is the one that answers every 'why'. It answers every question, otherwise that Islam is not Islam at all. ...that Islam is actually the name for the knot of iman, and the soul of iman, the soul of Islam, who is it? Maula-i Ka'inat 'Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali, who is the hallal-i mushkilat for everyone. When he was the hallal for all the khulafa, the one who removed the difficulties of the Prophet and removed the troubles, our mushkil kusha is also him. It is 'Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali who is the mushkil kusha for all. So the matter is actually this, that when man became distressed, then the time of distress, it so happened, was in 'Ali's own time that he became distressed. And after becoming distressed, now I will not say who had explained to him, who had sent that 'arabi person. Who had asked him, that when we feel shy to ask 'Ali something... when a difficulty arises, "You go and ask 'Ali." He came, that badwi comes, the 'arabi, he comes and asks 'Ali, "O 'Ali, I see that in our life there is both jabar and qadr. I see that there is a world of ikhtiyar and a world of jabar. How has Allah Ta'ala woven our life in this warp and weft, that there is jabar and also ikhtiyar? Explain this ikhtiyar and jabar to me, how far is ikhtiyar and how far is jabar? Where do the limits of ikhtiyar... of jabar... end, and where does ikhtiyar begin? Just tell me, I can't separate it, I can't measure life, I don't understand, and you please clarify this matter." Look, `kalimun-nasa 'ala qadri 'uqulihim` (Speak to people according to the level of their intellects). To give everyone an answer according to their intellect, this was 'Ali's work alone. Who could dare to face Maula-i Ka'inat? Not even a bird could flap its wings. It was the Maula who gave him exactly the kind of answer that befitted an 'arabi. He was that boorish kind of 'arabi. What did he know? You know the Arabs better, these badwis. He, as a badwi, went and asked. You said that, "Look..." He didn't explain to him that the matter of jabar is like this, the matter of qadr is like this, qismat is like this... all these things and philosophy, you did not explain. You only told him this much, "O person, you believe in jabar and qadr, right?" "Yes, Maula, I believe this. I see ikhtiyar, I see jabar, but I want to understand what kind of matter this is and how it is." You said, "Just stand in front of me." He stood up. He said, "Lift one foot." He lifted one foot. You said, "Alright, lift the other foot too." He put down that foot and lifted the other. He said, "No, no. Don't put the foot down. Keep that foot lifted and lift the other foot too." He said, "O Maula, what are you saying? I will fall." I will fall. So you said, "Look, the fact that you lifted your foot, that is your ikhtiyar. And the fact that you cannot lift the other foot, that is your jabar. You are placed in jabar and qahr in this way. You are woven into the warp and weft of ikhtiyar and jabar in this way. This much is your ikhtiyar and this much is your jabar." He went away very satisfied. And... but obviously, an 'alim, a corner of 'ilm, he would not be satisfied with just this. And you and I would not be satisfied with just this. We will ask for much alms from the Maula's court, that you give us more, so that we may understand well what qismat is, and what its [unclear] is, what its reality is, and how far it goes, and how this matter is. So the matter is actually this, that as I told you, unfortunately, it is the Muslims, such a qaum, who have put their reliance on qismat, put their trust in Allah for everything, placed good and evil on His shoulders, and because of which they became devoid of hidayah, and they did not get hidayah. And they did not get it to such an extent that you see, in no matter did they get hidayah. The Muslims. Otherwise, today the dates would be one. Today the Eid would be one. Today our every thing would be one. Today, the Muslims' milad, miladi tarikh, the dates are not one. Our Eid, our Eid is not one. All the nations of the world are laughing that the one who brought Islam, the Prophet alaihis-salatu was-salam, such a great reformer, and he did not even give a date to Islam. Today, the Muslims' Eid is not one. Today... no matter of theirs... today Muslims would not have been divided into so many sects. There would not have been so many classes, so many jama'ats, so many... one person ties their hands here, one person ties them here, one person ties them below, one person leaves their hands open. One person says that, "Well, I was doing wudu in a place in Panchgani, and by chance there was a step-well there. Taking water from the step-well, I was doing wudu. A gentleman came from behind, very pious, and a very long-bearded gentleman, and seeing him, I became very intimidated. I was young, and I was getting scared, 'O Allah, what's going to happen now?' He came and said, 'Are you doing wudu?' I said, 'Yes, sir.' Now obviously, sitting near the water at the time of prayer and doing wudu, what else would I be doing if not wudu? Washing my face? So I said, 'I am doing wudu.' You said... 'So...'" Then he asked again, "Are you doing wudu?" I said, "Yes, I am doing wudu." So he said, "Who is making you do wudu?" I said, "The one making me do wudu is that boy pouring the water, and I am taking the wudu." So he said, "The one pouring the water is a minor (na-baligh)." I said, "Sir, this... this is a minor..." So, "I... I am a major (baligh)." I am a major. He said, "No, you leave the matter of major and minor. You don't know shari'ah at all." I said, "Well, I don't know it." Alhamdulillah, I was indeed unaware. I was aware of the Hanafi fiqh, not of their... I am aware of the Jafari fiqh. They themselves are not aware. Because there are so many fiqhs, so many fiqhs, that there is the Hanafi fiqh, and its two students, Muhammad and Yusuf, their two fiqhs are followed. Now their students who were there, they made another fiqh. When the master made his own fiqh, what did the students say? They said, "Let's also make a religion one day, it will be good. At least our name will remain. We will also become an Imam." They also made a fiqh. So now this is the situation, don't even ask. The fatwas are beyond count. Countless fatwas. One person's fatwa is something, another person's fatwa is something else. One person's tafsir is something, another person's tafsir is something else. Brother, what is this? Is this Islam one or not? Is the Quran one or not? People come to me and ask... Hindus ask questions, they say, "Sir, by reading the tafsirs, our minds have become troubled." "What is in the tafsir?" I said, "Why do you read it?" They say, "Sir, then why do they write tafsirs?" Now tell me, what should I say? What should I explain? Who can explain to me what I should explain? What can I tell them? So, he came and got angry that "How did you do wudu?" I said, "Fine, tell me, I'll do wudu again." He said, "You can't do wudu again." "Good, that's a restriction. My wudu is also flawed." "It's gone." I said, "The wudu is gone?" "Yes," he said, "it's gone." "Good thing it's gone." So I said, "Should I do wudu again?" So he said, "You can't do wudu again." "Why?" "Because that same minor will pour." I said, "You pour." He said, "You're telling me that I should pour?" So, in any case, this is the apocalypse. You see? How many such stories can I tell you? There are very long stories. A similar incident happened in Delhi. I had gone to bring the body of a deceased brother from [unclear], and there I also had an encounter with strange people. They were from this Tablighi Jama'at. Oh my. May Khuda keep one in refuge from the Tablighi Jama'at. People seek refuge from Shaytan, I seek refuge from them. Don't even ask. They created such a commotion that they explained the entire philosophy of life and death to me, making me sit down. I kept thinking, with my eyes wide open, I am seeing, "What are they explaining? What thing are they explaining? What are they explaining?" And they are giving me instructions, "Patience, patience." And I am worried that I have come for a brother, it's not that he was my very close relative, but fine, my heart was certainly affected. But that doesn't mean... they kept giving me instructions of patience. They kept reciting 'inna lillah' and hugging me. I said, "Brother, please leave me alone. Let me do some work too." So now they started telling me the rules. "These are the rules of burial, these are the rules of the shroud, bring this much itr, there is this much fineness in it, it's like this..." Now I'm worried, what does he know about these details? I saw that it was better to use the 'Asaa-i Musa (staff of Moses). I said, "Sir, let me tell you one thing. There are women with me, and how did you enter here without permission? You are commanded to observe pardah in front of the harim, and why did you not observe pardah? They have come to their home, they have come for their husband's body, and so on. How did you enter?" By scolding them and taking up this 'Asaa-i Musa' like stance, I made them leave. Otherwise, you should understand that I probably would not have been able to get out of Bombay so easily. So, in any case, these are the kinds of matters, and there are many such, countless incidents have passed which we have faced. So, the point was that this state of the Islamic world that you see, it is before you. You have come and stood at this strange crossroads, and they themselves are troubled in their own place, but they don't express their trouble. Because every father tells his son, and the grandfather tells his grandson, "Be careful, follow the religion we are on. You have no right to object." When they go to the maulvi sahib, he says... "This is happening, that is happening." "No," he says, "all this is not happening. Your head is spinning. Your idea is wrong." So, in this way, neither the maulvi gave an answer, nor the 'alim gave an answer, nor did anyone give an answer. And many such incidents also happened to us. Because we, for no reason, used to go and provoke... that was an age, a time of youth, that we would go and provoke... and we would have to hear quite a few rebukes. Because we wouldn't get the answer. We wouldn't get the answers, but we would certainly get the rebukes. So, in any case, these are the conditions I am describing, that it comes and gets stuck on the point of qismat. What is qismat after all? What is qismat after all, for which... So, what Maula-i Ka'inat solved very easily... he is the hallal-i mushkilat, and he is the one who explains it, and he has explained all things, that qismat is like this, and your tadbir is like this. And if the Holy Quran has said that `lay salil insani illa ma sa'a` (And that man can have nothing but what he strives for), that there is no effort except what man has done, and `dhalika taqdirul 'azeezil 'alim` (That is the decree of the Exalted in Might, the All-Knowing), that for you there are also matters of taqdir, then both statements are true. Both statements are true. We should just have the right understanding. We are making a mistake in understanding, otherwise both statements are correct in their own place, and both statements are true in their own place. So what is the matter? That if we just sit with the ideas of the Muslims, then Jannah is finished, Dozakh is finished, Qiyamah is finished, the effort for deeds is finished, this 'abode of action' is finished, everything is finished and left behind. So leave this philosophy of Islam that you see in the apparent books. Only after leaving this will you get this idea that what I am telling you, what our du'at alaihimus-salatu was-salam, who have taken it from the door of 'Amir al-Mu'minin, the way they have explained it, I will explain it to you in that way. And its explanation is very easy, and although it is a bit of a difficult path to tread, it is not that difficult. What is the matter? That qismat... regarding that, you first see a common view. The common view is that this school of thought is divided into two types. There are two schools of thought. One is that 'We are the architects of our own fortune'. The other is that 'Fate goes where it likes'. Meaning, one is that we are the architects of our own destiny, the other is that destiny goes where it wants. Now you see, that we are the architects of our destiny and destiny goes where it wants, both these things cannot be true at the same time. When we ask this question, we don't get an answer. Those who believe in one thing... you cannot ride two horses at the same time. Either you say you are the architect of your destiny, or you say that destiny makes man as it wishes. Because we see both things, that when we work hard, we try, we study, when we go from primary to high school, from high school to inter, from inter to BA, from BA to MA, and then PhD, and finish our education and come out, we get our degrees, our certificates. And we have achieved success through our hard work. We are in great pride, "We became like this, we became engineers, we became doctors, we became this and that. We achieved it, we did it with our hard work." No doubt, you worked hard, and you got the fruit of your hard work. But if, suppose, you don't get this thing, and you... you are trying, and suddenly you get typhoid. There. Or suddenly you have an accident. There. Now your condition is such that your face is downcast. You are asking me, "Sir, what exam will I give now?" "What exam will I give, sir? Allah Ta'ala has afflicted me. Allah Ta'ala has afflicted me, I am caught in this illness. Now my condition has become so weak, there is no strength in my eyes, no movement in my hands, nothing at all. Nothing can be done now. Now it's not even possible, the memory has given up." So it is known that there is something... both things are coming into play. So this saying, that there, if we are understanding that such things happen, then what is the reality? It is that we have not correctly understood three words, whose meaning and whose implication was completely different. And I have perhaps said this at some time, or if I haven't, then I am saying it, and those three words are not in our dictionary. One is the word 'impossible'. The second is the word 'innocent'. And the third is the word 'accident'. Accident is an 'incident'. And 'innocent', he is... understand that in reality he is not innocent, he is a sinner. That is why he has come into the world. And 'impossible', nothing is impossible, everything is possible. Everything happens here. Everything is possible. When man progresses and progresses... just look at this, that from a mu'min, mustajib to mu'min, and from mu'min to mukasir, bazun, da'i-i mahsur, mutlaq, da'i-i balagh, then hujjat, bab. He can reach up to bab. The difference between us and a da'i is the same as the difference between a da'i and a bab. But one person, progressing, like Janab-i Ya'qub al-Sijistani, Maulana Hamiduddin al-Kirmani, Sayyidna Hibatullah, such people from Iran, or some people from Hindustan, have reached the level of babul-abwab. So was it not within man's capacity? It is within man's capacity to progress so much. So man can progress. It's not that he can't. So now, it is about understanding these three words. You are understanding those realities well which I have already explained to you. In the light of that, the accidents that happen, the incidents that occur, they are events. They are not 'accidents'. Not a single 'accident' happens. If, in this way, Allah Ta'ala brings about an 'accident', nauzubillah, nauzubillah, Allah will become unjust. Allah will become unjust. And Allah Ta'ala says, `wa ma rabbuka bi-dhallamin lil 'abid` (and your Lord is not unjust to His servants). Allah Ta'ala does not do injustice to people. And there is no injustice with Allah. So it is known that not even a speck can be hidden here. Look what the Quran is saying: `ma kasabat aydikum` (what your hands have earned). Meaning, whatever trouble befalls you here, it is what your hands have earned. So it is known that this is not from Khuda's side, this is... all these things are from our side. So what is known is that this word 'innocent', in the same way, when you have understood about accidents, then it is to be understood about 'innocent' as well. That to be innocent... this... what is this 'to be innocent'? "You are not innocent, sir, you are a great sinner. Fine. What about your child?" "Oh, he is an innocent soul. He is an innocent soul." Fine, brother. Your love is such that you have already given him the name 'innocent'. You have named him 'masum'. You see? And the... the Shia have named all their Imams as 'ma'sumin'. Of course, the A'immah are indeed ma'sum. But the point is, how is this child ma'sum? Brother, the child is not even able to walk from the cradle, and he has got measles, he has got this, he has got typhoid, he has had an accident, he has had an operation. Why, after all? Why this operation? Why? Is Allah Ta'ala, nauzubillah, unjust? So it is known that there are some things done by us ourselves. And when were these things done? Why is this happening after all? Why is this child doing all this? It is for us to think and understand. And 'impossible'... you are seeing that in the world, everything is being made possible. Those things which H.G. Wells used to say, 'things to come', and all the things of the world... he used to say that these are things of dreams, things of dreams. "What things are you talking about? Where are you talking from?" Before, in our Da'wat-i Sharif, about the atom... when the atom was explained and the atom bomb was made, 40 years before that, Sayyidna Ghulam Husain, may his secret be sanctified, had clearly written about the atom bomb. That the thing which is not indivisible, when a part can be made, then it is known that it has two parts. When it has two parts, then it is divisible. When it is divisible, then it is known that it will split into forces. So when this thing was known, then you see that no thing is impossible, but the impossible is being made possible. What you call impossible today, tomorrow science makes it possible. Today impossible, tomorrow possible. Today impossible, tomorrow possible. Now when this state is going on, how long will you say 'impossible'? Everything is possible. Now I will tell you, you will surely try to know such a thing that, "Alright, tell us such a new thing that our du'at say, which science has not yet produced." Alright, listen to that too. I will tell you that our du'at have said that the beginning of the daur-i kashf will be in such a way that `tayyul-ardi fi qadamikum` (the folding of the earth in your step). The earth will be folded under your feet. What does it mean? It means that your distance will be subject to your will. Distance subject to will. You wish... you just close your eyes and you have reached Hindustan, you close your eyes and you have reached Pakistan, you close your eyes and you have reached your home. But this was your spiritual and mental power. But the state of physical power will also be such that when the nafs... when the body becomes equal to the nafs, then the earth will be folded under your feet. You will say, "How will this happen? Is some wheel going to be attached?" Now you see that you have these mathematical minds and computers in the world, etc. What do you feel about them? Until this thing came out, and after it came out, how amazed you were looking at it. And God knows best, you may not be amazed, but I am still amazed. It is a thing of wonder, so one should wonder. But it is that Allah Ta'ala has more of that... only mashaAllah and subhanallah should be said, otherwise it will become shirk. That He has given us such powers and abilities that we are performing these wonders. So the matter is actually this, that as I have explained to you, these three words have no importance for us. But this, that a 'ma'sum'... Allah Ta'ala wanted to keep a model. A person... a mard-i mu'min he wanted to create. A person whom Iqbal calls a 'shahin'. He wanted to keep... an imam-i kull he wanted to show, for which the Quranic words are `wa ma ahsaynahu illa fi imamin mubin` (and we have taken account of all things in a clear Imam). All things... in which universals are folded, whose grasp all the universals are in, in which the universals are folded, such a person, who is not just one person, but an institute. Who has several universities within him, that is the person of the Imam, alaihis-salatu was-salam. Obviously, he is from there, from that world. What connection does he have with this place? For that reason... what happened? He became ma'sum. He became ma'sum. Now, the point is that as for the 'ghair-ma'sum' (non-infallible), now in comparison to them, the anbiya', will you call them ma'sum or ghair-ma'sum? So I will tell you that they too are in reality from there, they are also ma'sum. But you call them ghair-ma'sum in this sense, that they are of a lower rank and they are of a higher rank. Or we say this in this sense, that the people in their circle are of a lower kind, who are becoming their bodies. Those who are of the refuse, they are becoming their bodies. Those who have mailan, istihsan, and qisas, their bodies are being formed, so obviously, will such bodies face retribution or not? In that sense, we call them ghair-ma'sum. Do you understand? So the ma'sum persons are these very ones, and by keeping this ma'sum, Allah Ta'ala is showing that you too should adopt that 'ismah. So, in reality, no one is ghair-ma'sum except the Imam, alaihis-salatu was-salam, who are the people related to that world. These very ones can be ma'sum, no one else can be ma'sum. And accidents never happen in the world, nor is there any such thing as impossibility. And all things are possible. Everything in the world is... and what could be more possible than this, that you are leaving materiality and adopting spirituality? You are leaving this body and becoming a soul, you are leaving this body and becoming like the 'alim-i azba', becoming 'aql. So what more possibility do you need than this? So it is known that everything in the world is possible. This is the 'abode of action', this is what is called the 'daur-i kashf'. So, in any case, what I had to explain was that there are two schools, and the two schools are very firm in their respective places. One believes that destiny goes where it wants, the other says that we are the architects of our destiny. Now, how should these two be understood? This is a point worth pondering. I want your attention on how this will be explained. So what I was telling you is that how should we understand that this is also correct and that is also correct? Either one of the two is correct, as the world believes. No, no. The true fact is that although you see a contradiction in both, both seem to be at opposite poles, one is talking about the east, the other about the west, but both are saying the correct thing. Both statements are correct. Both statements are correct. The only thing is that you have not accepted the 'alim-i ruhani. Brother, just think, Imam Ghazali, what did he write? He wrote, 'alim-i jismani first, 'alim-i ruhani later. There. Just... even a person with ordinary intellect will say that after the 'alim-i ruhani comes into being, the 'alim-i jismani comes into being. That spirituality ends, then materiality takes over. They believe that first is the 'alim-i jismani, then the 'alim-i ruhani. So, how can this be? Because they turned away from 'Ali, they turned away from the truth. And when they turned away from the truth, they turned away from the Quran, they turned away from hidayah, they turned away from everything. So nothing will be found. Nothing will be found, nothing will be achieved. They will not find the truth. They will never find it. They haven't found it. Now you see that this saying, that "Alright, this is correct or that is correct?" As I have told you, both are correct. We ourselves are the architects of our destiny, and destiny goes where it wants. Now how to understand this matter? It is worth pondering. That point worth pondering is this, actually... ...that we will have to go to that same 'alim-i ruhani. In the 'alim-i ruhani, when we were falling, at that time of falling, we made various intentions. Now you will say, "Brother, intentions... what intentions could there be in a day? In the context of cooking, what food to cook? Or in the context of wearing clothes, which sari to wear? Or which suit to wear? Or what... and what work will I have to do today? After doing my professional work, what work will I have to do?" This will be there, in one or two days. Now what intentions would have been made there? The matter is actually that we press a button here and the work gets done there. So there too we made strange intentions. Now you would want to know what were the factors due to which the intentions were made. So the explanation of all those things is not very possible. And they are rather deep matters, which are a bit above our understanding. In any case, there, after coming here, whatever consequences you are facing... What consequences did you face? Relationships were formed. This became the wife, this became the mother, this became the father, this became the son, this became the grandmother, this became the sisters, these became relatives. And these became friends. And these became the neighbors, they became the city dwellers, they settled in this city, they didn't stay in that place, they stayed here. And it happened like this, and it happened like that. Now, a world of things... the livelihood was like this, we didn't get to eat those things, and we got this thing. We got these fruits, we didn't get those fruits. We didn't get the mango of Hindustan here, in Kuwait we got everything. Anyway, a world of such things are going on. So what had happened was that there, in that 'alam-i niyyat (world of intentions)... that is the 'alam-i niyyat, this is the 'alam-i 'amal (world of action). In the 'alam-i niyyat, we made various intentions. And for making those intentions, there were different formulas, different factors. Those different factors, you could have chosen them with ease, you could have done it with ease. I have only hinted to you about mailan, istihsan, and qisas. What is mailan? What is istihsan? What is mailan and what is qisas? I had told you that istihsan is when someone is doing a bad deed, and you appreciate it, saying "How well he is doing!" "He is slitting a throat." "He is doing a very good job. It would be better if he cut it with a saw." There. Istihsan is that someone is doing a bad deed, and you have a great cooperative spirit in you, you also go and start helping. "Let me also help him. At least if he is slitting the throat, let me give him the knife." So what is this? This is mailan. And what is qisas? To do that bad deed yourself. You said, "Why should others... why don't I do it myself?" And you did that bad deed. So now, these three kinds of actions' matters are also getting entangled here in all matters. So you see that if we just take the matter of qisas, it has three divisions. Now in the matters of livelihood, you see, in how many things you get entangled. That how many things' ration runs out here, then you see that your temper gets frayed. "Brother, the ration has run out. That thing has run out." And if Khuda finishes the ration from there? You can't do anything. So many times, many things stop. "Brother, what's the matter?" It is known that "It is written on our forehead..." "On every grain of food, the name of the eater is written." There you go, someone said a grain, I don't know, this is just going on, "On every grain of food, the name of the eater is written." What ignorant person... it's just going on. Now the situation is, "Brother, you didn't have that in your [unclear], you didn't have that thing, so you didn't get it. What can you do about it?" Those living in Hindustan don't eat zaytun. You live here, you eat zaytun. What can you do? So, in any case, there are many things, so the matters of eating and drinking, all these things come. And in the same way, in the context of living, in the context of life, and in the context of the relationship between sister and brother, in the context of the relationship of wife, all these things... you will say, "Brother, whatever happened here, happened. The relationship was formed in that place, it was formed. It has happened." "This is in Allah's hand. The pair is decided from there." You are saying this to console your heart. It is decided, but it is you who decided it and then descended. Allah did not decide it. Allah is 'as you are, so He is'. As you decided, you came down. Then you are crying before Allah Miyan. Why? Because if it turned out well, you take the credit. If it turned out bad, "There is a judge to punish the unjust." "Brother, we have been crying a lot throughout our lives, and for this, the entire responsibility... `al-khayru washarru min Allahi Ta'ala` (Good and evil are from God Almighty). It is from Allah Ta'ala." So this, all these relationships, everything, we created them there. We created all the relationships there. We did all the deeds of action there. Now you will say, "Brother, these... we have only made relationships within our Sulaymani jama'ah and our brothers and sisters, or something else?" "Sir, your circle, just as your hand reaches from here to Germany and who knows where else, and you have trade, business, giving and taking..." "What work are you doing, sir?" "I am doing import-export business." There. "It's very good, a very good business." You see? The uproar was that I asked one gentleman, "What work do you do?" and that poor man's work was of burial. And his work was to give ghusl. What did I know? I was going to the Zayarah in [unclear], and I met him. And next to the graveyard was a mujawir. And that person was coming behind me in such a way, I thought he wanted to ask for something. "What's the matter?" I said, "What work do you do?" And he said, "I do this work, sir. Burial, giving ghusl." So immediately that joke came to my mind that "I do import-export work." So, fine. So, as I told you, everything that happens, happens there. Whatever we did there, we did. Now you will say, "Brother, if Allah Miyan had explained a little, if He had given us the paper, we would have studied for four or six days and then given the answer properly, we would have got good marks in the exam, as is given here." There, Allah Miyan might not have given time. You got time, sir, everyone got the same time as you got. Now what can you do about it, that you did as you weighed? Allah is 'as you are, so He is'. You did as you weighed. But you made many intentions. You didn't just make a few intentions. Your horizon was expanding very far. You had become very broad-minded. Broad-minded to such an extent that your sympathies for the Shah-i Mutahhid... may God have mercy... on the contrary, you sympathized with the Mustakbir and the Mustakbir as well. You... there... "Oh my. What good people they are." "Brother, these are kafirs, these are mushriks." "Just by putting on a bindi they become mushrik? No. I have already made them my sister." Now you... "Brother, don't make them." "No, no, I have made them my brother. I have made them my sister. I have tied a rakhi." There. "Brother, what is this rakhi for? What is this sister for? What is this brother for? Understand this." "No, you understand. You are not understanding my point." Now these are the things that have happened to us, alhamdulillah. They have happened quite a lot. I am repeating those things to you, so that you too, if such an occasion arises, should answer with a smile. So, in any case, such occasions arise. Now, what to do? The reality is that we, there, with the Shah-i Mutahhid, with the Mustakbir and the Mustakbir, with everyone, created a relationship. The relationship is in such a state, why? Because when we were falling, we were all jumbled up. Someone's foot on someone's head... "Abdullah, there is no one else," and we have to stay in a crowd, we have to fight and quarrel, in some way, we have to live with trouble. We have to live in graves anyway, so let's just think that trouble is trouble. Whoever's house it is, next door is next door. "He is a neighbor." "Although they are very bad people, but what to do? Allah has put us in the same trouble, for no reason He has made him a neighbor. He has not given me a good neighbor. If I had got a good neighbor, it would have been very good. This is one trouble for me." If you ask the other person, he will say that this is the biggest trouble. So, in any case, all these neighbors, etc., all these things, what are they? All these are matters from there. You will say, "Brother, what delicacy will there be? What factors will there be? Does Allah Miyan... such small things..." Brother, when you are taking a morsel from one plate, and you are also saying, reading a verse, "On every grain of food, the name of the eater is written," then tell me, how are the intentions from there? The intention for each and every thing. To be fair, to be dark... "If Allah had just changed the features a little, it would have been better." Have you ever been satisfied? Those who will be satisfied... A child was born, so they said, "It would be good if he had grandchildren." "If his grandchildren also had children, it would be good." No child was born, so they said, "It's very good that no child was born, but if this thing had happened, it would have been good." Because man is never silent. Either he becomes very handsome, or very... "If He had made me a Habshi, but at least I had got a PhD, it would have been better." There. Someone doesn't want to be a Habshi, but a PhD is wanted. That... and someone wants that, someone wants this. So, in any case, as much as being black, yellow, features, giving, taking, high, low, short, tall, fat, thin, all these things, the doer of all these things... was you. It was you. We were the ones doing it, no one else was. We were the ones doing it. "When the Qassam-i Azal distributed, he gave to each what he was capable of." What is capability? The capability you created yourself. As you do, so will you get marks on the paper. Now what will you do about it? You will say, "Brother, if the factors were known a little... if some practice was given here..." The factors can be known, but you should try to read. You should try to move forward. This is something that is a matter of mouth to ear. It's not like I am sitting here revealing secrets in a gathering. "Every secret cannot be revealed, O wise one." It cannot be so. This is... I have created a desire in you for this, that you, with more desire, should try to acquire this 'ilm. Don't make yourself capable in such a way, and worthy of it... as I had said, we are like that child who is born in a gold mine and a diamond mine, and has played with them, kicking them, and has considered the diamond as a kunkar. The result of playing with it all his life was that 'a chicken at home is just lentils', he considered it a stone and sat down. We are the inheritors of diamonds and jewels, but the result of being an inheritor is not that you will get it at once. You will have to get it gradually. Purity will be achieved gradually. You will get everything gradually, but you will not get 'ilm gradually? This cannot be. You will have to acquire 'ilm as well. For this, one has to strive a lot, one has to try a lot to acquire it. So, in any case, as I was saying, we did everything there, and here in the 'abode of action' we are... now the 'abode of action' is this, that you, first of all, the Lord of the worlds, when its... when the time for your appearance came... you had also intended this, when your appearance would be, at what time it would be. For this reason, the Prophet has said, "Every matter is bound by its time." It will happen according to its time. So now the time came, you appeared here. Now, when you appeared, what happened? Along with appearing, Qudrat created for you that entire taqdir which you had come from there having done. This is your taqdir. Now you have become bound by your taqdir. Now you are living your life. Now if you were to only walk according to the signs of taqdir, then man would become helpless. But you are not helpless. You see that you eat what you want, you cook what you want, you wear what you want. You have full ikhtiyar. So when there is a world of ikhtiyar here, then it is known that Allah Ta'ala has given both ikhtiyar and jabar. What is jabar? That which you have already decided. And what is tadbir? That which you are doing. This is tadbir. And at the time of doing tadbir, now this is a very deep matter, a very deep matter. I will want your attention, please understand it well and listen carefully. That deep matter is this: that to us, the Lord of the worlds, as much as there is the matter of jabar... as much as there is the matter of jabar... understand well... as much as there is the matter of jabar, and I have extracted this summary from all the books, and I am presenting that essence before you, that as much as there is the matter of jabar, there the Lord of the worlds has done what? He has appointed the mala'ikah. Do you understand? As much as our matter of jabar is, for which we are helpless... got typhoid, got this, had an accident, it happened like this, it happened like that, whatever thing we are helpless in, there the mala'ikah are appointed by Allah. The `mudabbirati amra` are appointed. The mala'ikah-i kurubiyyin are there, the mala'ikah-i safa are there, the mala'ikah... don't even ask about their forces. It's countless. When a malak descends with every drop of rain, then the question doesn't even arise. It's a countless force. So the mala'ikah have been appointed, so that "Look, lest it should happen that whatever, according to jabar, was their intention, that action should take place where it is supposed to." They are supposed to be struck here, they must be struck. This thing is supposed to happen, it must happen. This thing is supposed to be received, it must be received. All these actions, who are the doers? The mala'ikah are appointed. And as much as our ikhtiyar is, what is there? There, the book of Khuda and the rasul of Khuda are before us. They are guiding us, they are calling out, `da'iyan ilallahi bi-idhnihi` (one who invites to Allah, by His permission). The callers by the command of Allah... the Rasul is calling, 'Ali is calling, Hasan is calling, Husain is calling, the A'immah are calling, the du'at are calling, the voice of all is one, they are giving hidayah and saying, "Come to Khuda's side, come to our side, understand, this is the correct path, this is the correct way. Look, this is good, this is evil, this is that..." Why are they explaining this? So that we do not do any wrong within our ikhtiyar. Did you see? Within ikhtiyar, because you have the ikhtiyar, whether to cut fruit with a knife or to cut someone's throat, this is the ikhtiyar. So you have been stopped, that "Look, don't cut a throat with a knife." They taught both din and dunya. This is why the Rasul came, this is why the anbiya' came, this is why the awliya' came, this is why the A'immah came, this is why the du'at came, and they gave hidayah for this reason. So did you see? This was the matter of jabar, this was the matter of ikhtiyar. So as much as jabar was, in that, the mala'ikah are appointed, that it will happen. That is a matter of your taqdir. But this is the mercy of Allah Ta'ala, that Allah Ta'ala, in the matters of jabar too, if we have done some black and white, then here we have got stuck. We... so then Allah said, "Look, I am putting one thing before you. There is a page that you have made black and white. And you have drawn lines on it, and now those lines... whoever the comprehender is of those lines, he will understand them. A computer person will understand it in the context of a computer, in that context he will understand. Every expert will understand it in his own context. So you have made it black and white. I am putting that page before you. And now, to erase or not to erase from it is not in your power. But in your hands too, there is a power. To erase is my work, to keep is my work. `yamhullahu ma yasha'u wa yuthbit, wa 'indahu ummul kitab` (Allah eliminates what He wills or confirms, and with Him is the Mother of the Book). Allah erases whom He wills, and keeps whom He wills. But if you want to erase, I will erase. If you want to keep, I will keep. But now you don't know what you have done and what you haven't. So it's better that you keep reciting the daily du'as, you keep doing istighfar. You keep wanting everything, you keep asking every question." You will say, "No, brother, I have a bank balance of 4 lakh rupees. I won't give it for the Salwa." For the Salwa... "Brother, is it my house being built? It's the Jama'at's house being built, the Jama'at will manage." "It's a huge [unclear]." "What do we have to do? We have two days left, we are in the beginning, and we are not getting the funds for the Salwa." "What a sad thing." So you see, this... so what do you want? That somehow this thing should happen. So you saw that somehow this thing... So there you always want that Qudrat... this is why the mala'ikah have been appointed, that in jabar, the thing that is to happen will happen. So Qudrat has given a rubber in your hand. He has given a rubber that this black and white which you have done, the intentions you have made, you cannot go up and erase those intentions now. Whatever you have done, you have done there. But, O my people, if you want to reduce the things from there as well, then you will have to recite the daily du'as. And for this reason, I am giving a rubber in your hand. Take this rubber and keep rubbing it. Close your eyes and rub it, the lines will be erased. Qudrat, whichever line it wants to erase, it will erase. Your troubles it will remove. And what is that rubber? It is du'a. The du'as that we recite, the saheefah we read, the recitation of the Quran we do, especially the du'as we read, what is this du'a? It averts qada. Brother, du'a averts death. Du'a averts calamities. When the Nabi says it, he does not say it wrongly. So it means that this you... what do you know how many things you have erased with du'a? You say a lot. When your child is saved after falling from a height, then, "Which good deed came in handy?" You see? So the good deed that came in handy is your own good deed. But you had recited those du'as, so that good deed came as a result. To the extent that Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq says that if this du'a, suppose, is not accepted here, never be disappointed. It can never happen that Allah Ta'ala will reject your du'a. These du'as will be found by you on the day of Qiyamah. And it will be successful. You will say, "Brother, when there was a need in the world, at that time Allah Ta'ala did not make it successful, and He is giving its reward in the hereafter. What is this?" The time will be a little longer... Now, if He had given it to us there, it would have been good. And now Allah Ta'ala is giving us in Qiyamah, what is the use of that reward? Yes, sir, but what will be the situation? That man will need the reward of du'a the most at that time. And for this reason, we countless people, at the time of Qiyamah... meaning, our own qiyamah, at death... at the time of death, we will make this very du'a and will say this, "O Lord, have mercy on us, and these things that we are seeing, these things of happiness that we are seeing, where have these hasanat, these good deeds, come from, O Lord? I didn't do so many good deeds." So it will be said, "O person, these are your du'as which were successful, but the reward was kept for today." He will say, "O Allah Ta'ala, you have shown great mercy that you have given it for today. On this day, I only want provisions. I wish this was not a small provision, but a very large provision. I wish He would not have accepted any of my du'as, O Lord, I accept everything. That none of my du'as would have been accepted in the world, and they would have been kept for the day of Qiyamah." So innumerable people have said these words. That's why Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq has said that this will be the du'a of a mu'min, that "I wish he would not have accepted any of my du'as, and would have kept them for the day of Qiyamah, for the day of death." So the matter is actually this, that this, as I have said about jabar and qadr, that whatever jabar is, that is our... what is that? There the mala'ikah are appointed. Lest some discrepancy should occur. Yes, in that, discrepancy Allah is the doer. Allah is powerful in this way, `innallaha 'ala kulli shay-in qadir` (Indeed, Allah is over all things competent), in this way, that if you wish, Allah will also wish to change it. But you should want forgiveness. And to the extent that the Prophet says that if you do not want forgiveness, then I will destroy you and create another qaum who will sin and then ask for forgiveness from me. So what does this mean? Does it mean, God forbid, to sin? It means that you should want forgiveness. You are sinners, you are people of nadamah. You have fallen and fallen, and you have repented. When you have repented, it means that you had made a mistake. And for the mistake, you will have to ask for forgiveness, and you will always have to ask for forgiveness. So it means that these two things are necessary, there is jabar and there is qadr. So what we do there, we get its reward here. And we are getting its full effect, and we are... well... being bound by it. And those things are happening to us. You keep coming out of the room, you will never get a knock. But that same door, which is supposed to give you a knock, and your foot... your foot gets swollen, you are troubled. But at the time that retribution was to happen, it happened. At the time that thing was to happen, it happened. Everything is bound by its time, it is to happen, it will happen. Brother, when death is bound by time, life is, then will your retributions not be? Will your accounts not be? Everything is bound by time. And I too am bound by time, that alhamdulillah, the funds for the Salwa will be collected, and the work of the Salwa will be done. This is Khuda's work, and Khuda's work is not going to stop, Allah Ta'ala is the one who will bless it. It doesn't matter if someone gives or doesn't give. But it is that I will not be taking a good impression with me. I am repeatedly saying and warning, but the attention that is needed has not yet been given. So I am requesting your attention in this matter as well, that this is a golden opportunity, and if it goes out of our hands, then the golden opportunity will not come again. We have to do it, we have to do it quickly. So this was not a parenthetical statement, but an interjectory one that I said to you. But now what is to be said is that now you see that, "Alright, we understood this, that we have come into life, so we, whatever we had intended from there, we have reaped its fruit here. Now tell us, what is the matter of qismat after this?" So, I would want your attention, that we, here in life, are doing dual work. One is that we, whatever we had intended from there, we are fulfilling it. The other is that in the world of ikhtiyar, we are offering namaz, we are fasting, we are giving zakat. According to the nisab... "Brother, whatever it is, just give it. Whatever has to be done..." "Just put it in the hisab, brother, what's the use of thinking?" Zakat for Allah Miyan is being given only. The hisab is in the account. Hisab in the account, money in the envelope. And you have given it. "May Allah, for Allah's sake, may Allah accept." Allah will accept it just like that. Allah is 'as you are, so He is'. With whatever intention you have given, Allah has accepted it with that same intention. So it is known that this is the absolute decision of Qudrat, and it will happen. This is the absolute. So it continued like this. Now the point is that what you are now doing in the world of ikhtiyar, this is becoming a fruit for you for the hereafter. `innal akhirata khayrul laka minal ula` (And the Hereafter is better for you than the first [life]). Your hereafter is better than your first life. Why is it better than the hereafter? Because you got to know here. So my brothers and sisters, you know now what the reality is. So it is known that now we will do more 'deeds of action'. We will fast, we will offer namaz, we will do this and that, so that we can reap more fruit in the hereafter. Because this... now in the same way, as you intended there, and its fruit you got here, now you will intend here, and in the coming birth, in the coming life, after a thousand years, as I have told you, when you will appear, then the fruit you will get will be of this life. So it is as if... another explanation I will give with an example, and I hope the example will be clear. And that example is like this: that I have put a machine, science has made it very easy, and it's a tape recorder, you see. And in the tape recorder, I have put two tape recorders together. And one tape recorder's reel, I have started it new. And the other tape recorder's reel, I have... started it. Now there are two tape recorders, two reels. One reel is filling up, one reel is unwinding. Do you understand? The one that is unwinding, those are our intentions which are playing here. And the tape that you are filling, these are the intentions for the future which you are making. What you have already done there, you have heard here. Now you are doing both things here, you are filling and you are also listening. You are filling for the coming life. You are listening for this life. What you are listening to is the echo of the dome, 'as you say, so you hear'. This is jabar. And what you are filling, you are going to hear that in the coming life. So you, I hope you have understood from this example, that this is our life of jabar and ikhtiyar, and these are the kinds of crossroads, that you are like this. There are many incidents, incidents of the A'immah, incidents of the du'at, which come in this context. But how far can they be narrated? They are very detailed. In any case, as much of the philosophy I had to present, and the qismat which I have presented before you, I have presented it with brevity, that we are the architects of our destiny, and destiny also goes where it wants. And it connects in this way. That whatever we are filling, we will hear it. For that reason, while filling, one has to fill with understanding. And what we are hearing, we are helpless in that. What has been filled is what we will hear. Now, to erase or not to erase this is not in our power. This is in the hand of Qudrat. And for this reason, we want forgiveness, we recite du'as. After the Prophet, people came and asked the Imam, "O Rasulullah, what about reciting the Holy Quran or reading a du'a? These du'as, we have written them, the A'immah have written them, the du'at have written them, people have written them. This Quran is the word of Allah, it is anwar-i zakiriyyah, it has come from there, it has come to the Prophet, it has descended on the heart of the Prophet. So about this..." You said, "Which thing is more excellent?" He said, "Both things." They said, "O Rasulullah, please tell us, which is the most excellent?" You said, "Du'a." "Du'a is more excellent." "Why?" "Because Allah Ta'ala likes the words of our nadamah." "But this is His own word, the Quran. He does not like it that much?" "He likes it, but relatively not as much. He likes the words of our humility more. He likes our humility more. That's why He likes du'a more." For this reason it has been said that du'a averts qada. Brother, the subject of du'a is quite long, when does it... but what... where... can it be narrated? But tomorrow and the day after, there will be a lesson for two days. Insha'Allah, Qiyamah is also approaching, and the narration of Qiyamah is also approaching, and that has to be narrated, otherwise you will say that you did not even do Qiyamah. So we must go through Qiyamah. For this reason, insha'Allah, its narration will also come. Insha'Allah, tomorrow and the day after, both days there will be a lesson. And the time will also be a little extended, just as it got a little extended today, it will be extended a little. And, insha'Allah, I will try to finish it. But I hope that you have understood this thing, what is the matter of qismat, and what our du'a does. There is only one rubber in our hand, only one thing, only one reward, only one weapon, with which we can mend all our things. And the one who has used it, has used it. So it is known that may Allah Ta'ala give us the tawfiq to understand these sciences which are from the Ahl al-Bayt, and above all, from the door of Maula-i Ka'inat we have received them, and by its grace we have understood all this. And we should understand this, we should act upon it, and we should remember it, and we should raise our children in this way, so that they remain on the religion of truth, on the Sulaymani Jafariyya religion. Wa akhiru da'wana anil hamdulillahi rabbil 'alamin, as-salatu was-salamu 'ala rasulih, Sayyidna Muhammadin wa 'alihi ajma'in.
