His descendants, whose name, Maulana 'Uzayr's descendant's name was 'Uzr. He was the one who, after him... and the chain continued after 'Uzr. And here, Hazrat Musa had appointed Janab Harun as his khalifa, had made him his vasi, and a strange thing was this, that on several occasions it happened, in the 124,000 anbiya', that the people raised the issue of election and wanted to take the election into their own hands, that we want to elect. This was also spoken of in the time of Hazrat Musa, and they took the election into their own hands. But that was a strange kind of election, that even after holding the election, they... Hazrat Musa had such great influence that they did not tell him their name, but Janab Musa had given them signs. And they held the election, and this incident, they elected the very one whom Hazrat Musa wanted, meaning Harun. Harun, and they were chosen. And after Harun, his descendants, who were... whom... whom Janab Musa had placed reliance upon after him. But after a little while, Janab Musa who... they made his nephew his successor. Now, in this way, the chain of nubuwwat continued in its place, several anbiya' passed, and from above, the chain of a'imma continued, who are the Aqa, who are the Malik, who are the rabb-i dawr, who are the sahib-i waqt, and their chain continued. Maulana 'Uzr came, after him his descendants came. As this chain continued, it reached Maulana Khuzaima. Maulana Khuzaima, who is among the anbiya' of Allah, Janab Khuzaima saw that 1,000 years had passed, but now an even better nabi should be sent, and one who is natiq, and who serves the qiyamullah, and comes to do the work in the world, and he should be a sahib-i kitab nabi (prophet with a book). So Maulana Khuzaima's gaze fell upon Hazrat 'Isa. Now, first of all, the issue is the paida'ish (birth) of Hazrat 'Isa and the wiladat (birth) of Hazrat 'Isa, that matter, that was the most important, for him to be born, then to grow up, to receive ta'lim-o-tarbiyat (education and training), to become worthy of being chosen for the rank of nubuwwat and risalat. This was the biggest problem. Now, the fact of the matter was that at that time, when the era of Hazrat Musa was ending, Zakariyya Nabi, who was a lesser prophet, whose zikr (mention) is in Surah Maryam. Surah Maryam begins with the zikr of Janab Zakariyya. And Allah has praised Janab Zakariyya greatly. A very blessed zikr has been made by Allah in the Qur'an-i Majid of Janab Zakariyya Nabi, that he was such an 'abid-o-zahid (worshipper and ascetic), Janab Zakariyya, that Zakariyya'l-mihrab (Zakariyya of the prayer niche) became famous. The mihrab got its name from him, that he would always remain in the mihrab, engaged in 'ibadat-guzari (worshipfulness) and du'a (prayer) and munajat (supplication). Janab Zakariyya. So, this Hazrat Zakariyya, he was za'if (old), and he had no aulad (children). And he, being related to the Al-i 'Imran, said, "O Allah, I wished I had a son who would be my waris (heir), and who... but what can I do, I have become za'if, and my hair has turned white, and so I... and there is no such thing as having hope for a child now. And my wife has also become old." At that time, Allah gave a nida (call) and said that "Why are you so sad, O Zakariyya? Allah will grant you a ghulam (boy), will grant a son, who will be your successor, and who... " So, Hazrat Zakariyya was given a son, and this very son's name was Yahya. This is the very same Janab Yahya who is buried in the mosque of the Bani Umayya in Sham (Syria), and his tomb is there. And that is such a pak-o-pakiza (pure and holy) mosque that its founders were not such good people, the Bani Umayya, but that mosque is very noble, for this reason that it contains tremendous aasar (relics). Among those aasar, the greatest effect is that Janab Yahya's maqbara (tomb) is there, in the middle of the mosque. And the two minarets you see are where the Ahl al-Bayt were made to stand when they were brought to the court of Yazid. So those places where Janab Imam Zayn al-'Abidin and the other Ahl al-Bayt were brought and made to stand, those places have been elevated. So now, all the ahl al-tashayyu', the Shi'a people, when they go to that mosque, they go to those very places to perform their 'ibadat and pray. And though for us the entire mosque is blessed, those places where the Ahl al-Bayt sat are the most blessed of places. So, the point was that Hazrat Yahya was his son, for whom the command came in the Qur'an-i Majid, "O Yahya, take the kitab (book) with quwwat (strength)." Meaning, you, the kitab that has been given to you, you should establish its shari'at with full power. So, through ilham (inspiration), he was given a kitab, and that kitab was... by Yahya. And because he was not a natiq nabi or a mursal nabi, his zikr is not made with the same frequency as Musa, 'Isa, and Janab Ibrahim. Now, in the matter of Hazrat Zakariyya, it happened that Janab Maryam is mentioned, and she is called ukht-i Harun (sister of Harun). That she was Harun's sister. Now, this is a historical matter, and I don't have the direct reference for what it is, but it's possible she was the daughter of 'Imran. But she had a special relationship with Janab Zakariyya, or it was certainly the case that Janab Zakariyya raised her. He definitely raised and nurtured her. And just as Janab Zakariyya would sit in the mihrab and perform 'ibadat, Hazrat Maryam, when she was born, she was in his care, and so she would also be seated in the mihrab and perform 'ibadat, just like Janab Zakariyya. Now, the fact of the matter is that this Maryam of Zakariyya, who would sit there, read, and pray, she became famous as Maryam-i Zakariyya. And in that same era, there was another Maryam, and she was Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah (Mary Magdalene), who is called... so that Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah was a separate person, and she was... What happened was that Allah, where He intended to describe in the Qur'an, has mentioned Maryam-i Zakariyya but intended Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah. Now, you see, what happens is, as I said, a mughalata (misconception) occurs there. Now you would say, how can this be? But it happens, it is Allah's word. And for this very reason, Allah said from the beginning: `f-as'alu ahl al-zikr in kuntum la ta'lamun` (so ask the people of remembrance if you do not know). Ask the ahl al-zikr if you do not know. If you don't understand, ask the ahl al-zikr. The ahl al-zikr meant the people of the Qur'an, who were the Ahl al-Bayt. They were the Ahl al-Bayt of the Rasul. Meaning, they were the masters of ta'mur (esoteric interpretation). But they didn't try to ask them. They started asking others besides the Ahl al-Bayt of the Rasul, and whoever's qiyas (analogy) came to mind, they explained it in that way. So this was a wrong thing. They were supposed to ask the ahl al-zikr, but they didn't ask. Because of this, they went astray, and the matter became corrupted. In any case, the fact was that in that era, there was a Maryam who was... and she was Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah, whom they call [unclear]. And that Maryam was in her own place. And so... Now, this matter of Hazrat 'Isa, Ruhullah (Spirit of God), whom they call the spirit of God. After all, why? Was he superior to our prophet that he was called Ruhullah? Hey, there was Kalimullah, there was Khalilullah, you could have called them something too. But what was the reason for calling him Ruhullah? The reason was that Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam's mother was not touched by any human. And because she was called the Virgin Mary, and from her, Hazrat 'Isa was born (tawallud), for this reason they say that Allah had infused his nafs (spirit/breath) into her, blew his spirit into her, so he became Ruhullah. So, this is what became famous, and indeed, this was the zahir-i ta'wil (apparent interpretation) because of which he became famous as Ruhullah. And what was the second thing? He was called Masih. Why was he called Masih? Because he used to travel a lot (siyahat). He used to wander a lot, he wouldn't stay in one place, and he would keep moving from here to there, to there, to there. That's why one who travels a lot is called Masih. So Masih was his name, and Ruhullah was his name, Hazrat 'Isa's. And Janab Maryam, from whom 'Isa's wiladat (birth) was to take place, who was she in reality? She was Maryam-i Zakariyya. It is Maryam-i Zakariyya who was a very devout woman and held a very high rank. Just as Maulana Fatima asked Sayyidna Nabi, "My rank, what is it? And you say about Janab Maryam that she was the sardar (leader) of the women of all the worlds, then what is my rank?" She asked Sayyid al-Anam, the master of the universe, "What is my rank?" He said: "She is sayyidat nisa' al-'alamin (leader of the women of the worlds), while Maryam is sayyidat nisa' al-'alam-i ha (leader of the women of her world). Maryam was the leader of the women of her time, you are the leader of the women of all creation." You understand? Now, this Janab Maryam who was the leader of the women of her time, she was Maryam-i Zakariyya. She was of a very high rank ('ali-darja), a very esteemed ('ali-qadr) lady. And it happened to her that the Lord of the worlds sent wahi (revelation) to her. The wahi was revealed in such a way that a farishta (angel) came down with the wahi, and this is mentioned in the Qur'an-i Majid, that the angel came to Janab Maryam and started saying to her, "I have come to you so that a son may be born to you." She said, "What kind of thing are you saying to me? No human has touched me, nor have I... done anything. And how can you say this?" He said, "I am not saying this from myself, I am saying this on behalf of God. I am telling you from the Qur'an. I am telling you this on behalf of God. I have brought this news, this basharat (glad tidings), to you. And Allah wants a son to be born to you, and I have appeared to give you this good news." Obviously, the angel wasn't talking about marrying her or anything, but it was the infusion of the spirit (nafs-i ruh) into Janab Maryam of Janab 'Isa, and that angel gave this good news on behalf of Allah, and Hazrat 'Isa was born (tawallud). And... So what was the real matter? I am now telling you its key. Listen and understand. That she was, in the language you know and understand, an umm-i zakar (mother of the male principle), Janab Maryam was. And in the ta'mur, the station she had, Hazrat 'Isa's, the effect that was falling from there, of the muhtajib (veiled one)... the muhtajib of Hazrat 'Isa... I told you about nisbat-i adna (lower relation) and nisbat-i a'la (higher relation), you should understand that well. The effect of Hazrat 'Isa, that effect was established here. Where? At Maryam-i Zakariyya's. That effect came here. And that effect, obviously, is not something that has to enter the sulb-o-raham (loins and womb). The thing that enters the sulb-o-raham, which one is it? I have already told you that it is our Namiya, which comes out from the father's sulb, and after mingling in the [unclear], after falling, after coming into the [unclear], after mixing, it comes into the mother's womb and is born. So, the thing that comes through the process of tanasul (procreation) is that. But here, the effect that came, the very first effect, was held by Janab Maryam, and she nurtured that effect with her own being. That effect's name is 'Isa. Do you understand? Please pay attention. The name of that effect, for now, if you don't understand, just accept this much: the name of that effect is Janab 'Isa, and that effect was being nurtured (parwarish) by Janab Maryam-i Zakariyya. And after that, when the angel told her, "O Maryam, if people come and ask you where this boy came from, then you say that I am fasting for Allah today." `lan ukallima 'l-yawma insiyya` (I will not speak to any human today). I... `samtum li 'r-rahman` (I have vowed a fast to the Most Merciful). I have kept a fast for Allah, and today I will not speak to any human. So, it used to be a fast of silence. So Hazrat Maryam was instructed by Allah that, "You say that I am fasting today, I will not speak to anyone." And the people will go on their way, you won't need to give any explanation, and Allah will protect you. Apparently, this is the whole story. And that was not a matter of sulb-o-raham, not a matter of wiladat. It was a matter of nurturing an effect. Janab Maryam fulfilled that duty. But then, that thing was handed over to whom? To Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah. Do you understand? It was handed over to Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah. And at Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah's, just as all children are born, in that same way, Hazrat 'Isa was born (tawallud). Where? At Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah's. At Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah's, Hazrat 'Isa was born, just as every child is born. And not without a father, rather her husband, Janab Maryam's husband's name was Yusuf, who was a carpenter. Joseph the Carpenter was there, and he was the husband of Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah. And her son was Janab 'Isa. He was the one who was first nurtured by Janab Maryam-i Zakariyya. Fine. Now when Hazrat 'Isa was born to Maryam here, the community started to gossip. What happened was that she too was commanded to hide her husband's name, and she concealed it... that her husband's name should be hidden. The real matter is what? It is that with us, we often see that if the husband is a very well-known person, the child is known more by his father's name. And if the mother is very well-known, famous, and distinguished, then he becomes known by his mother's name. Like, say, [unclear] Elizabeth's son, is known by her name. Her husband was Prince Philip, nobody knows him by that. It was the same kind of situation here, that the Janab Yusuf was an ordinary believer, a common believer, counted among the common believers, so for that reason he was of no account, he wasn't considered significant. And Janab Maryam was... he wasn't brought into the limelight in any special way. In any case, it was concealed. Now what happened was that the community, you know how women are and how communities are. The community started saying that "how has she conceived? This girl was unmarried, and now a child has even been born, this is a terrible thing, what is this uproar?" And the Qur'an has described this in detail. And the community came and started saying, "O Maryam, your father was not such a bad man, he was a very noble man, a very good man. And your brother, Janab Harun, was also a very good man." The Qur'an is saying this. And all this was there, "So where did this child come from to you? How did you acquire this fault?" Now Janab Maryam said, "What do I know? I will not give any answer today. Yes, you can ask this child, the child will give you the answer." Just as God had instructed her, Maryam-i Magdalaniyyah, she said the same thing. And the community went towards the cradle. They came to the cradle of Janab 'Isa and started saying, "O child, tell us, what your mother is saying, what is the matter?" So the Qur'an testifies, Allah says in the Qur'an-i Sharif, that there in the cradle, the newborn child said, "I am Abdullah, `atani al-kitaba wa-ja'alani nabiyya` (He has given me the Book and made me a prophet)." "I am a servant of God. Allah has given me a book and made me a prophet." This testimony that the child gave, they were astonished. That a newborn child doesn't speak. This child is speaking. And not only is he speaking, the amazing thing is that he's talking like a prophet. He's saying, "I have become a prophet, and Allah has given me a book." It was a very astonishing thing. They expressed their surprise and said, "O Janab Maryam, this is a very strange and wondrous thing. We have never seen or heard such a thing." The whole community left, surprised and bewildered, and Janab Maryam was saved. Now, Hazrat Maryam's condition was that she was hungry, and taking her child, she went outside. And going out, she said, "O Lord, I have come out with my child in search of food." And Allah sent a wahi to Janab Maryam, "You, the date palm that is in front of you, just shake it. Fresh ripe dates will fall for you, `rutaban janiyya`, and from it you can eat your fill and drink its water." "This is your first meal, which you will give to this child." So, she shook the dates down and acquired them from it. The real matter was what? These dates and all were the ma'jizat (miracles) that were for Janab 'Isa, and all these things were happening. And Hazrat 'Isa was now growing up. And as Hazrat 'Isa was growing, over here Janab Zakariyya's son, Janab Yahya, was also growing. Now both of them started to grow. As Hazrat 'Isa grew older, over here Janab Yahya also started to grow. And having grown up, Hazrat 'Isa, before him, he read many books and acquired a lot of 'ilm (knowledge). After acquiring 'ilm, there were indications from the Imam of the Time to Janab 'Isa, "Go, 'Isa, and try to acquire some ta'lim (teaching)." And he went and acquired ta'lim from whom? From Janab Yahya. From Janab Yahya bin Zakariyya, Janab 'Isa acquired ta'lim. And 'Isa kept studying. And Yahya's four years of education were completed. And it's a very strange educational method of his too, that regarding the alphabet 'alif, ba, ta, tha', he asked strange questions: what is before 'alif', what is before 'ba', what is that and that? So, it was a very strange style of questioning and reading, and of Janab Yahya's teaching. In any case, those common things passed, and from that school, as an ustad (teacher), he gave that ta'lim. And when Hazrat 'Isa completed his education in his place... ...then Hazrat Imam, Janab Khuzaima, now gave a nida (call) to Janab 'Isa, "O 'Isa, we were choosing you for risalat-o-nubuwwat (messengership and prophethood), and we saw this 'ilm in you, and we want to make you a sahib-i kitab nabi (prophet with a book) and entrust you with the duties of risalat-o-nubuwwat." This message that Hazrat 'Isa received from Janab Khuzaima... before this, in the incidents, it has been told how a young man goes out to earn his livelihood, and his mother said, "You are becoming old, and now that I am young, I should go and earn something, so that I can make a living..." So he went to an Englishman, who used to dye clothes, and took up a job there. Hazrat 'Isa. And he went to the dyer and said, "I want to work for you." He said, "That's a good thing. I have a job of dyeing clothes." He said, "What is there to do?" He said, "This is the tub, this is the dye, this is how you have to dye the clothes, and here is the dye and all the clothes mixed together, and like this..." Hazrat 'Isa, on the very first day, performed a spectacle: he mixed all the dyes, mixed all the clothes, and then, doing a spectacle, he separated the dye and all the clothes were colored. And that master said, "You, on the very first day, have caused such a loss. I... how will I teach you this trade? After all, what... you have ruined the whole business. The business of dyeing has been turned upside down. After all, what is this?" So Hazrat 'Isa said, "You... if you doubt my skill, then whichever color you tell me, I will give you the cloth in that color." He said, "This cloth was red, this cloth was this, this cloth was yellow." So Hazrat 'Isa would dip it in, and as he pulled it out, the cloth would be colored that way. So this was the first 'ejaz (miracle) of Hazrat 'Isa that you showed. And that dyer was astonished and said, "This is a great miracle-working elder." And after that, these were the initial, initial things, the light that was shining in Hazrat 'Isa, and after that Janab Khuzaima appointed him his da'i and entrusted him with nubuwwat (prophethood). Now, when he was entrusted with nubuwwat, after being entrusted, there is a style of expression. Just like today, how many Muslims are there who call upon Allah with the word "Miyan" (master). Some call him "Tu" (you, informal). This is a style of love. So everyone calls upon Allah in different ways. Some say "Allah Jalla Jalaluhu", some say "Miyan". Some say "are, tu" (hey, you). So, it's a style. In the same way, Hazrat 'Isa had a style, that he would call upon Janab Khuzaima, and how would he call? "O father." "Fadir, Fadir" he would call. "Father, father" he would call. And what did the people understand? That 'Isa is calling that Allah... And what did the people understand? That 'Isa is calling that Allah, who neither begets nor is begotten, he is calling him and saying "father". You understand? And when people would ask Hazrat 'Isa, "Who are you to him?" He would say, "I am his son." It happens that the one who performs `nas` (infusion of spiritual rank) is the father, and the one upon whom `nas` is performed is the son. With us, this system is eternal, it is established from eternity, and it will remain until Qayamat. Always, the one who performs `nas` is the father, and the one upon whom `nas` is performed is the son. He is the sababi (causal) son. Whether he is a nasabi (lineal) son or not is a different matter, but he definitely becomes a sababi son. So when he becomes a sababi son, it was in that sense that Janab 'Isa would say, "I am the son, he is the father. I am his son." He was not saying anything wrong. But what is to be done when the community misunderstands? Hey, good sir. And they would say, "You show great 'ejazat (miracles), you do these things, how are you doing all this?" Hazrat 'Isa wouldn't say much about it, he wouldn't try to make people understand. And when you would go anywhere, as is mentioned in the Qur'an, you would pay attention to the sick and make them well. The abraṣ (leper) and akmah (born blind), as mentioned in the Qur'an, those kinds of patients, incurable patients who were brought, you would place your hand on them and recite a prayer, and they would become well and healthy. And seeing these 'ejazat (miracles), people were becoming believers. And just as every nabi was given some mu'jiza (miracle), so Hazrat 'Isa was given this mu'jiza. And with this mu'jiza, he was doing his work, and people were gathering around him. And they were saying that this person is doing such great work, giving shifa (healing) and making the sick well, what greater work can there be? And they started following Janab 'Isa. In this way, 'Isaiyyat (Christianity) was spreading. And they saw that Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam is doing this work, so they started saying, "Hazrat 'Isa, you sometimes become mustaghraq (absorbed/engrossed), a light descends upon you, what is this matter?" Hazrat 'Isa said, "My father sends the ruh al-qudus (the Holy Spirit) upon me." "He sends down the ruh al-qudus." What is the ruh al-qudus? It is Jibril. It is wahi. Ruh al-qudus, wahi, all these words, what are they essentially? They are different names for Jibril's, the wahi's, various methods. Upon him, through him, those things would come. Janab Khuzaima was in his place, and nubuwwat had been conferred, and the work was continuing. And the most important things that were coming were from the injil (Gospel). The book, the Bible, that was being sent to you, and Janab 'Isa was constantly compiling and transcribing the Bible. And he was telling his people, the hawariyyun (disciples). Who were the hawariyyun? They were Yunus, Andubas, Lut, Fitras (Peter), whom they call Peter, Fitras. And there are many names, who were Greek. These were your hawari, Hazrat 'Isa's, who were with you and would note down those things and obey your commands. But what happened was that, because Allah willed it so, that the book that would remain for all creation until Qayamat, if any book remains, it is the Qur'an-i Majid. Other books, there is not as much need for them for that community, just as you understand, if a person is sick, and the sick person goes to a doctor, the doctor gives him a prescription according to his illness and treats him, and the patient gets well. But that prescription is no longer valid. Now, if another patient comes, say after two years, his illness has changed, a cough has developed, new things have developed, obviously he will write a new prescription. That old prescription will not be effective now, because the illness has increased or changed. If he comes a third time, there will be a third prescription. In the same way, the anbiya' came in their own places to every ummah (community), and seeing the illness of the ummah, these spiritual physicians, the anbiya', would treat them. But here what happened was that these prescriptions kept changing. And the Lord of the worlds had made a promise regarding these prescriptions: `inna nahnu nazzalna 'z-zikra wa inna lahu la-hafizun` (Indeed, it is We who sent down the Remembrance, and indeed, We will be its guardian). "Hey, this Qur'an-i Majid, We have revealed it, and We will protect it." This book would have been erased, God forbid, God forbid, the Qur'an would have been erased, such incidents had happened before. But the Lord of the universe, Amir al-Mu'minin, who were its protectors, they saved it. They saved it and kept it exactly as it was (`min-wa-'an`), without letting any alterations happen to it. Its protection was constantly done by God. `Inna lahu la-hafizun` (Indeed, We will be its guardian), Allah says, "We are its protectors." And He always protected it. But for these other books, there was no such promise of protection. After all, what was the reason for this? The reason was that their planes (dawa'ir), their point of descent (sutur), the place where they descended, was a lower place. This Torah, Injil, Suhuf-i Ibrahim, Suhuf-i Musa, Suhuf-i 'Isa, all these things that were coming were from the lower planes (sutur). But the thing that was coming from the 'aql-i awwal (the First Intellect), from the 'aql-i awwal the thing that was coming, from the sijill-i ilahi (the Divine Scroll), that was the Qur'an-i Majid. The anwar-i jibriyya (the lights of Gabriel) that were coming from it, they were from where? From the 'aql-i awwal. This is a book that will not be abrogated. That is why it was said that this religion will remain until Qayamat. Its naskh (abrogation) is not certain. That's why no one can change it. And that's why Allah took upon Himself the responsibility of its protection. So, the point was that because Allah had not given a guarantee for those, that's why the Bible was not protected and it was changed. And you see today in the [unclear] the matter is that no one can claim that this is the same original Bible that was with Janab 'Isa. No. It's possible that some things are there, but one has to search and find them. There are many interpolations, many things. No one can say. Just as the name 'Aziz, and the name of Allah, and the name of Janab Khuzaima, it cannot be erased. It cannot be, because they themselves say that it is not. So it became known that its protection was not guaranteed. That prescription was for that time, and it ended. That's why that happened, but it's not like that with the Qur'an-i Majid. And until Qayamat, it will remain protected. Now, the matter is that when Janab 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam was entrusted with risalat, he, as a rasul (messenger), started to preach. And the first thing he preached was about asceticism. That it is better that we leave our homes and become absorbed in the worship of Allah. We should adopt great taqwa (piety). We should be completely detached from the world. And it was a kind of ruhbaniyyat (monasticism), the style he had. Ruhbaniyyat in its true meaning, which is to be completely cut off from the world, it wasn't exactly that. The meaning was that, being separate from home and family, you should worship Allah in seclusion. This is what you were preaching. And you would always say that you should keep yourselves in a state of fasting for Allah and constantly give zakat. He would give great importance to the obligation of zakat. He would command fasting. He would command namaz (prayer), just as namaz was commanded to us. He would teach and definitely perform namaz. This is the preaching you were doing. And the things that were permissible, the things that were forbidden, the matters that were there, these, because for you the era of Hazrat Musa is distant. The era of Hazrat Ibrahim is even more distant. The era of Hazrat Adam is very far away. That's why the details of their shari'at did not reach. But the details of Hazrat Nuh's time reached, that in his time this was permissible, this was not permissible. This is a temporary thing. Permissible and impermissible, I have already told you, that it is connected to different places and times. If those things are there, this will be haram. If those things are not there, this will not be haram. In any case, there are channels, different channels. If it is possible, if God wants to open it, He opens it. If He wants to close it, He closes it. But who knows that it is opened or closed, besides the nabi? The nabi will tell us that this channel has been opened, this channel has been closed. For example, I'll tell you. Today, with you, I will mention such a thing that you will be a little surprised. That you know what things are halal. You know very well. And what things are haram, you know very well. But you know that the rabbit is also halal. You know that people eat rabbit, it is halal. But I am telling you that just now, a matter of a few hundred years ago, it has been made haram, the rabbit. Why? Because within that channel, some such things are coming that it has been said from above, "Look, it is better to stop this." Because we believe in them, `Ati'ullaha wa-ati'u 'r-rasula wa-uli 'l-amri minkum` (Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and those in authority among you), so we obey them, and they are telling us that they are seeing certain things in the channel and that's why they... So... you will say, how did this happen? It happens by chance. Things happen in the channel. Sometimes such things come that they see and immediately give the command, and from then on it becomes haram. So, in any case, Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam was saying "father, father," he was calling out to Janab Khuzaima. And Janab Khuzaima, you would remember him, and you would call upon your rabb (Lord), your malik (Master), your aqa (Master), your Imam, and you would call him by the name of "father." Now, the greatest mu'jiza (miracle) of Hazrat 'Isa that happened was raising the dead. That raising of the dead happened in such a way that Sam'un as-Safa was with you, and you, it's a famous story, that when a dead man was brought to you, and people were crying and weeping a lot, that he was young and this happened, he died, and the circumstances are such, how will we manage... In such special circumstances, Janab 'Isa would give them consolation, and he raised that dead man, but in seven days he raised him. It took seven days for you to raise him. You would recite words over him, and after that he would get life, but after seven days he would be raised. Hazrat 'Isa. And this matter, where does it come in history? When the Lord of the universe, Amir al-Mu'minin, a slain man whose head was separate and body was separate, and in Kufa they had buried him, you raised him. Whose name was [unclear] Budrayqa. When you raised Budrayqa, at that time you had said, "O people, that was 'Isa who would raise the dead in seven days, and they would... I am the wasi of the nabi, and I am 'Ali ibn Abi Talib, and I am... from Allah, I have come as a qiyamullah, and I will say 'qum bi-idhnillah' (rise by the permission of God), and watch, he will get up." You hadn't even said `qum bi-idhnillah` yet that he got up and sat down. This is what Hazrat 'Ali had shown, and all the people of Kufa saw it. There are many miracles. And today you have heard the details of the 'Alawite sciences. You have heard all those stories. You have heard all those accounts. You have heard all those details that I have narrated before you regarding Amir al-Mu'minin. There is no limit or count to the Master's words. That is why it has come in the Qur'an-i Majid that if all the trees, all the trees in the universe, are made into pens, and the entire ocean is made into ink, and the words of my Lord are written, the words of my Lord, Allah's words, will not be exhausted. In reality, what is the meaning of "words of my Lord"? Allah, who is that being who cannot be encompassed, what will we say about His essence? Hey, all those things will be contained in the material. And they will be contained in the human potential. And whose is that human potential? It is Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali's. That your virtues are such. And that is why, regarding the Lord of the universe, it was said... ...that regarding Amir al-Mu'minin 'Ali, if someone praises him, and in front of you people, it is Hazrat Paighambar alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam who said it. "Remember, do not belie it if you do not understand it. Do not belie him." You should see the level of 'ilm that if it doesn't enter our understanding, the Nabi's command is to not belie it. It may not enter your understanding. But those are the virtues of 'Ali. Whose virtues can be, O God, whose praises can be? How can there be an appraisal of the Lord of the worlds? From whom can there be an appraisal of the Master of existence? Hey, whose servants, whose slaves, are these anbiya-i kiram, Ruhullah, Kalimullah, Najiyullah, what not... ...he whose slaves they are, what must that Master be like? What must that 'Ali be like? So in any case, that 'Ali was the door to the city of the Nabi's knowledge. So, Janab... Janab 'Isa was constantly with Janab Khuzaima. And if Khuzaima would take anything, from whom would he take it? From that same Lord of the universe, 'Ali. Now, what happened was that when you started to raise the dead, the community saw and were astonished, saying "This is a great miracle, 'Isa. No one has ever done this before. You have even raised the dead." Just as it is in the Qur'an-i Majid, "You have raised the dead." This is a very astonishing thing. And that Janab Sam'un as-Safa, who was standing there, his companions, one of them started asking him, saying, "Sam'un, just as happens with us, to acquire something, we try to ask our close companions, 'Tell us, how did you do it?'" In the same way, he started asking Sam'un as-Safa. "Tell us, what did he recite? What did he recite that caused this dead man to rise?" So just tell us too. And Sam'un said... Sam'un said, "Brother, it is the Ism-i A'zam (the Greatest Name) that he recited. It is the Ism-i A'zam that he recited, that's why this happened." And as you know, in Islam the Ism-i A'zam exists. If someone knows the Ism-i A'zam, he will fly in the air, walk on water, he can do everything if he gains command over the Ism-i A'zam. So Sam'un said, "He has gained command of the Ism-i A'zam." The meaning is that he has become aware of its reality. But in any case, there is blessing in its name as well. And all these things. Now, in all the Islamic books, you pick them up, and in them you'll find: "Ya Hayyu, Ya Qayyum, La ilaha illa anta, fallan, sallallahu 'alayhi wa-sallam, fallan, fallan..." there are tons of Ism-i A'zams written. And it is written that this is the Ism-i A'zam. And other people have said what? "All the Ism-i A'zams our elders have written, let's gather them all in one book." It's better to recite them all, somewhere or the other the Ism-i A'zam will turn up. Somewhere or the other the Ism-i A'zam will come, maybe its effect will happen. So, nothing is gained from these kinds of talks. The reality is, like the naba'-i 'azim (the great news), that the final news, for which 1,24,000 nabi came to give news, that... ...the glad tidings of which 'Isa himself was giving, `wa-mubashshiran bi-rasulin ya'ti min ba'di ismuhu ahmad` (and bringing good tidings of a messenger to come after me, whose name is Ahmad), "I give you the glad tidings of that nabi who is coming after me, whose noble name is Hazrat Muhammad Mustafa, peace and blessings of Allah be upon him, and Ahmad Mustafa is his name in the heavens." So "Ahmad" you said. In the same way, the nabi... that nabi who was the naba'-i 'azim, that final news, who was it? It was Hazrat Nabi. In the same way, the Ism in reality, the Ism-i A'zam, who were the Ism-i A'zam? They were Maulana 'Ali. It was 'Ali's name. But what was the meaning of Ism-i A'zam? The meaning was that we are aware of his reality. To be aware of his reality was the meaning. You see, these are the realities that accomplish great tasks. For instance, there was a great elder of ours, whose name was Sayyidna Hasan bin Nuh, he... I have mentioned this before you two or three times about him, Sayyidna Hasan bin Nuh. He, when he went for the ziyarat (pilgrimage) of the Master of the Universe in Najaf and came back, so... ...that elder went for the ziyarat of the Master of the Universe, and reaching there, he stood at the door of the Rawdah (tomb) and recited the ziyarat. And after reciting the du'a, he said to the bawab, the guards who stand there... ...he said to those gatekeepers, "Please open the door for me, I want to perform ziyarat." The guard said, "What are you talking about? You know that it remains closed for months. It is not opened." He said, "Brother, it is my grandfather's grave. Let me perform ziyarat." Have you seen? This is it. This is the fire inside that was burning, the nur (light) that manifested, so his tongue began to speak in this manner: "It is my grandfather's grave." And he... These are nurani (luminous) chains. It is very difficult to understand them. In any case, what he said was not wrong. When he said, "It is my grandfather's grave, open it. I want to perform ziyarat," the guard was astonished. "What a strange thing you are saying. And you look like you are a sayyid from India." So, he was surprised and started to mock him. `Tastahzi'u 'r-rusula 'uzwa` (mocking the messengers...). The Qur'an says that the messengers were mocked. So this is nothing new for our Da'is. Anyway, he was also mocked. And mocking him, he started laughing and jeering. And Janab Sayyidna Hasan bin Nuh began his munajat (supplication). And of the Prophet alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam, he began to narrate all the points... ...with wahi. And no one is understanding it, and his eyes are filled with tears. And when he finished his munajat and was in supplication, the lock just fell off. And he went inside with his companions, with the rijal-i yaum who were with him, he went with them, performed the ziyarat, and came out. And there was a great commotion. There was a commotion in Makkah, and it became famous in Madinah too, "Who was he that came, who was he?" There was an uproar, and you left Najran and returned. So, in any case, what I mean to say is that when realities exist, and when they will it, then nature also wills it. `Wa-ma sha'na sha'a Allah` (And what we willed, Allah willed). We will what God wills, and if God wills, we will. Hey, they have willed so much that upon God's will, whatever God willed, they have always willed it. Today the situation is that nature itself is asking, "Now what is your pleasure, tell me." "Now tell me, what is your pleasure? Now we want to see your pleasure." So now, nature is asking for their pleasure. Today this is the state of the raziya-mardiya. So this is the matter. So when he, Janab Sam'un as-Safa, got agitated... in any case, what did he think, what not, he said some things. "I... this is its name, whatever the name was in that language, you taught him the name. And that person memorized it. And running, he said... ...that this is the Ism, this is what it is. He was passing through a jungle, and there he saw a carcass lying there. It was a big carcass. He said, "Let me just try it out on this to see how much of a miracle it is, what it is." And he blew on it. And when he blew, it was actually a lion's carcass. It was a lion's carcass. It was a complete... and suddenly the lion jumped up. The lion became alive, jumped up, and ate him. That is why it is said in the Qur'an-i Sharif, `la tas'alu 'an ashya'a in tubda lakum tasu'kum` (Do not ask about things which, if they are shown to you, will distress you). "Hey, O people, do not ask about such things that if their real answer is given to you, it will become a cause of harm for you." Did you see? That "do not ask about such things that if their answers are given to you, it will become a cause of harm for you. It is a loss for you." "Your answer... you will get the answer, but it will be a loss for you." "So it's better not to ask such a question at all." This was the matter. So in any case, this is an incident, it is a digression. But now Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam, you left from there. People said, "O 'Isa, after all, how will you spend your life wandering like this? It's better that you build some house for yourself and live in it." Hazrat 'Isa said, "If you are making me so weary, then I have no house, no home." He hadn't even married. He said, "Now that you are saying so much, fine, if you are building a house, then build my house in such-and-such place." The place he designated was right on the bank of the river, adjacent to it, a place, and he said, "This place is where a house should be built." They said, "O 'Isa, you have pointed out a place where waves are crashing, and obviously nothing will last there." He said, "What is the use of building such a house that is going to be destroyed, that is going to break and fall? I want to build an eternal house, over there." "What is to be gained from this house? That's why I don't want a house." So he used to give such teachings, Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam. And in your time... ...Allah, just as in the time of Janab Musa, created great hakims (physicians/sages), in your time too, great hakims came. And who were they? The greatest was Buzasif. The great hakim of your time was Buzasif, who was a great hakim. And another hakim came whose name was Zardasht. Zardasht, who the 'Isais, today's Parsis, consider a god and what not. That Janab Zardasht, he was a very great... not only was he a great hakim of that time, but the Imam of the time had chosen Zardasht in his place. And he had said, "I want, O Zardasht, that I am revealing wahi to you, that you now compile a book and write it." So, by the command of the Imam—whoever the Imam of that time was—by his command, Janab Zardasht wrote a book, which is called Nawashir. Nawashir means scrolls. Those words that he had written... ...that book was written on 12,000 cowhides. It was written on 12,000 cowhides, that book, in that era. And that was Zardasht, Janab Zardasht, who wrote that book. And he was a very esteemed elder, and he was. But what happened was... ...that the teachings he was receiving from the Imam alayhi-s-salam, and the 'ulum (sciences/knowledge) he was being granted, in the process of granting that 'ulum... ...it was a natural thing that he could not understand properly. A moment came when those 'ulum were of such a kind, just as Janab Adam was forbidden from going near that granary, perhaps it was the same kind of matter. Bayra-dil-i says that perhaps Zardasht could not understand, and his intellect could not grasp it. "Hey, this... whatever there is, it is the sun, which gives light to all things." The Imam was explaining some other nur (light), and he understood it as the light of the sun. That's it, he got caught up in that nur, nur, nur, and ended up turning towards the worship of the sun, and he went astray and departed. In this way, there are many who were on the path of truth and strayed from the path of truth and departed. So, in any case, in that era, there were also many other hukama (sages). One of them was Noshirvan-i 'Adil. Janab Hazrat Noshirvan-i 'Adil, who was the king of his time, whose justice will be remembered in the world, that Noshirvan-i 'Adil's justice was so tremendous... ...that there was no justice to compare with it. Just like Janab Hatim Ta'i, in whose generosity there was no other generous person, that Hazrat Hatim Ta'i was a Da'i. In the same way, Noshirvan-i 'Adil was also a Da'i. He was a Da'i, with us. And this Hazrat Noshirvan-i 'Adil was also granted great virtue by Allah. In the same way, there was a Da'i in the time of Hazrat 'Isa, in Hazrat 'Isa's time. And his name was Bakht-i Nasr. Bakht-i Nasr, who had built the Hanging Gardens in Babylon, they still exist today. And they say that it's like there is water underneath it, and that garden... ...he had built it, Bakht-i Nasr. He was also a Da'i, and he did the work of compiling. So these are all those personages of the era of 'Isa who passed, and who did great works, Bakht-i Nasr, Noshirvan-i 'Adil. And in the Aywan-i Kisra, the priestesses who were there... the Aywan-i Kisra, which was in Iran, the priests who were there, they used to worship an idol, and they would bow and pray before that idol. So, an elder came there and asked, "O priests, this idol that you are worshipping, whose idol is it that you are worshipping?" So they said, "This is a very beautiful idol, and we are worshipping it. We don't know whose... whether it's an existing human or not, but it's a very beautiful person, and we are worshipping him." It became known, he told them, that this is Noshirvan-i 'Adil whom you are worshipping. But the reality was that on Noshirvan-i 'Adil, the jila (polish/radiance) of iman (faith) was shining, the light was shining, wahi was descending, because of which he looked like that, Noshirvan-i 'Adil. In any case, all these elders of the religion passed in their own places, great hukama came. And Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam's era... ...the eras of the prophets before him, which lasted for a thousand years each, Hazrat 'Isa's era was not like that. Rather, it was for 600 years. Your era was for only 600 years. And Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam, you, now your matter is coming to a close. And the Last Supper, which is mentioned with great pomp and circumstance, that you ate wine and bread, and that... ...among the 'Isais it is said that "last transubstantiation," that the bread and wine turned into the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ. These बातें from the Christian beliefs, it's all empty talk, it's not like that. But Hazrat 'Isa was definitely giving some teachings which were related to our 'ulum (sciences). Obviously, it was the same 'ilm. But those people could not understand those things. Now, after this, you know that the Romans were after them, and they were in pursuit of Hazrat 'Isa, and it was becoming very difficult for him. So, his greatest enemy was named Saharbuta. Saharbuta was his name, who arrested Hazrat 'Isa and killed him, crucified him. His name was Saharbuta. Saharbuta sent the soldiers to arrest him. At that time, you were sitting with your hawariyyun, and that garden, which is in the [unclear], and in that garden, sitting under the olive trees, you were giving teachings to your hawariyyun. And the police arrived there to arrest you. At that time, what did you do? You showed such a 'ejaz (miracle) that all the hawari became 'Isa. All of them became 'Isa. All their faces became the face of 'Isa. Now they came, the police, and were confused, "Who should we consider 'Isa? And whom should we arrest?" So the police were confused and left. But after leaving, the police conspired again. And among those people, your hawari, like Fitras, Mathusa, and all these, in all of them there was a Yahuda (Judas) who was your hawari. They brought him over, made a deal with him, and said, "You guide us." Yahuda promised, "I will give a sign as to who 'Isa is." So when they came again to arrest him, the situation was the same, but Yahuda gave a sign that "This is 'Isa." And Janab 'Isa was arrested. And they took him away. And the apparent story is that after taking Hazrat 'Isa, they put a crown of thorns on him, and did this and that, and beat him, and took you away. And those places still exist today, from where you were taken. And there are places where you fell, being wounded. And where that man... those places are built there in Bayt al-Muqaddas, and I have also prayed there. So, in any case, all those places still exist today, and they were taking Hazrat 'Isa from there. Now, you see, the most important matter that comes is `wama qataluhu wama salabuhu walakin shubbiha lahum` (they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, but it was made to appear to them so). That he was not killed, nor was he crucified, but for them a resemblance was created. Now, among the 'ulama, one of the great 'alims of the Muslims is 'Abd al-Majid Daryabadi. 'Abd al-Majid Daryabadi writes two mas'alas (issues), and in them he writes that this issue of 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam, `wama qataluhu wama salabuhu walakin shubbiha lahum`, the fact of the matter was that... ...the custom of that time was that the Romans... You can imagine, such a great empire, such a large army, could such a thing happen that they were put into doubt, as the Qur'an said, and they were put into doubt in this way? After centuries have passed, after 1400 years, 'Abd al-Majid Daryabadi is born and decides a great issue for Muslims in this way, that he was put into doubt in this way, that he was carrying the cross and because of that he was crucified. This is a very ordinary thing. Hey, these are matters of nature, they are according to nature. Hey, he was made to... a resemblance was created for him. Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam was given a resemblance. Meaning, in his place, someone else was crucified. He, whoever was to be his fidiya (ransom), that fidiya was made. I told you that this is the raz-i abham (the most obscure secret). But nature does not give such pain and suffering to anyone, and especially the anbiya-i kiram are free from defeat, harm, being beaten, being broken, and from illness. Hey, will they, who are giving guidance, come and fall sick like this? Was Husayn coming to be killed? Was Hasan coming to eat poison? Was 'Ali coming to be struck by the sword? No, no, these are the people of the ta'mur. They are coming to give you guidance. They are not coming to be beaten. But all this will happen so that the punishment upon you becomes severe. You considered Husayn... you considered 'Ali... you considered Fatima and dropped the door on her, so you will get the punishment. So to establish this punishment, to establish the hujjat (proof), these things happen, and the punishment becomes severe. So in any case, this is the way of the world, and it has happened and will continue to happen. So, for Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam, the matter was that `walakin shubbiha lahum`, that a resemblance was created for them, and they thought it was 'Isa, but in reality, it was not 'Isa. And he whose cross was to be given, was given the cross. And Hazrat 'Isa alayhi-s-salatu wa-s-salam, when he was taken from there... Now, another interpretation has emerged, and what did they do, as I told you, the aqa'id-i nasara (Christian beliefs), they said, "No, the real matter was..." "...that the affair of the crucifixion was such that when they took him down, a spark of life was left in him. And over there, his hawari, who were there, took him away and went to Kashmir. And in Kashmir, they nurtured Janab 'Isa, and he passed away there." But there was no need to invent this story. And it was that Hazrat 'Isa's da'wat (mission), the da'is who came from your side to India, and whose name is Bulus, and he was sent to Kashmir. And after going to Kashmir, he did a lot of work. That's why today, 'Isaiyyat (Christianity) is very prevalent there, in Kashmir. In Kashmir, he did a lot of work. So, these kinds of things were there. But now, this idea that a spark of life remained there and 'Isa was taken to Kashmir, this is not the meaning. Nothing like that happened. But 'Isa was the nur-i khuda (light of God), and you know that I have clearly explained to you the whole story... ...what the body is and what the soul is. He has the same power over the body as we have over our clothes. That is why, for Hazrat 'Isa, what happened was that after being crucified, you were buried, but on the third day, you were seen everywhere. Now, you are... people are astonished, here and there, a clamor started, a commotion. Janab Sam'un as-Safa, people grabbed him and started asking, "You are his wasi, you are his deputy, please tell us what is happening?" So Janab Sam'un started saying, "What do I know? I don't know anything." Hazrat 'Isa himself appeared to Janab Sam'un and asks Sam'un... 'Isa asks Janab Sam'un... "O Sam'un, after me, how does it seem to you?" He said, "My master, you have gone. Now the world is desolate for me. And what will I do in the world without you? You were my master, now you have gone." You asked, "What do people say about me?" He asks Sam'un, "O Sam'un, tell me, what does the world say about me?" So he said that they say that in reality... The world says... "What the world says, my master, that... the world is confused, but the people of 'ilm say that you are the nur-i haqq (light of truth). Verily, you are the nur of God." "And you are such a nur that has no... and does not enter the sulb-o-raham, and it is such a thing that no earth or direction can contain it." You smiled and said, "Yes, O Sam'un, it is just so." This was the final answer you gave to Janab Sam'un after your departure. In any case, Hazrat 'Isa's [mission] was completed. Now, they say that Hazrat 'Isa was raised up (marfu'). Now, this being raised... ...these are other matters. The real matter is to explain his ranks. Hazrat 'Isa passed away in his place. When the Rasulullah (Messenger of God) can depart from the world, it means nothing that... when his service was over, it was over. As long as the service is not over, no one has the audacity to lay a hand on that nur-i khuda, on that nur-i ilahi. No one has the audacity. Hey, did Shimar have the audacity to slaughter Husayn? He could not. He did not have the audacity. Hey, from whose kick a thousand springs would gush forth, did he have the audacity to do that? He did not have the power. Hey, they were the ones who were preventing it themselves. Do you understand? The Lord of the time is himself. So in any case, these were the stories of the anbiya', and regarding their awliya'... I should not narrate before you the affairs of the a'imma, for which I do not have the heart or courage, nor the tongue to narrate the state of the a'imma, who are the pure nur. These were their reflections, the stories of the anbiya' that I have narrated before you, Adam, Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa, 'Isa. And now, regarding the Master of the Universe, God willing, I will definitely narrate. There too, one's steps falter, because there, there are both aspects. There, one has to explain nubuwwat and also explain imamat. It is a very, very great station. And it is a very precarious station. And it is such a tremendous station that regarding it, as I have told you, hey, the entire account of all the nisbat-i adna and nisbat-i 'ala, its entire axis is the person of the Master of the Universe. God willing, I will try. Now, God willing, our lessons are reaching their conclusion. And from next week, the lessons will be there. And I will try that if... the balance of Amir al-Mu'minin's [discourse], and if possible, some other... from Amir al-Mu'minin, and after that, some... its continuation, God willing, the courses will be finished. But you should remember one thing, that where I have left the lesson, that should remain in your minds. I had explained ratq, natq, waqt, etc., and the effect of the surroundings, that should be in your minds, because the link will be made from there. I will make the link from there, and after that, how qiyamat happens before you, and this... the qiyamat of the lessons will also happen.
