# The Orphan and His Grandfather

The Messenger of Allah (ع) lived in the care of his grandfather 'Abd al-Muttalib. A mattress used to be laid for 'Abd al-Muttalib in the shade of the Ka'ba, and his sons would sit around it waiting for him to come out, and none of them would sit upon it, out of reverence for him. The Messenger of Allah (ع), still a small boy, would come and seat himself upon it, and his uncles would take hold of him to draw him away. Whenever 'Abd al-Muttalib saw this from them he would say:

«دعوا ابني؛ فوالله إنَّ له لشأناً»

"Leave my son. By Allah, he has a great matter destined for him."

Then he would seat the boy beside him upon the mattress, pass his hand over his back, and take delight in whatever he saw him do.

When death came upon 'Abd al-Muttalib, the Messenger of Allah (ع) was an orphan in his lap. He entrusted him to his son Abu Talib ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib, and the charge he laid upon him continued:

أَوْصَيْتُ أَرْعَى أَهْلَهُ لِلرِّغْدِ
بِابْنِ الَّذِي غَيَّبْتُهُ فِي اللَّحْدِ
بِالْكَرْهِ مِنِّي ثُمَّ لَا بِالْعَمْدِ
فَقَالَ لِي وَالْقَوْلُ ذُو مَرَدِّ
مَا ابْنُ أَخِي مَا عِشْتُ فِي مَعَدِّ
إِلَّا كَأَدْنَى وَلَدِي فِي الْوِدِّ
مُحَمَّدٌ أَرْجُوهُ لِلْأَشُدِّ
وَكُلَّ أَمْرٍ فِي الْأُمُورِ
قَدْ عَلِمَ الْقَوْمُ مِنَ أَهْلِ الْعَهْدِ
أَنَّ الْفَتَى سَيِّدُ أَهْلِ نَجْدِ

"I have charged you to tend his household toward ease, on behalf of the son of him whom I have hidden away in the grave, unwillingly on my part and not by any choosing of mine. And he said to me, and the saying is one to be relied upon: My nephew, as long as I have lived among Ma'add, has been to me as the dearest of my own children in affection. Muhammad, I hope for him that he will come to full strength, and to every matter among matters. The people of the covenant have already come to know that this youth is the master of the people of Najd."

It is related that when death drew near to 'Abd al-Muttalib he gathered his daughters and said: "Let each one of you lament me while I still hear what you say, before I die." Each of them lamented him with verses, and that is recorded in the accounts of the Sira.

When 'Abd al-Muttalib died, his son Abu Talib mourned him, saying:

أَبْكَى الْعُيُونَ وَأَذْرَى دَمْعَهَا دِرَراً
مُصَابُ شَيْبَةَ بَيْتِ الدِّيْنِ وَالْكَرَمِ
كَانَ الشُّجَاعَ الْجَوَادَ الفَرْدَ سُؤْدُدُهُ
لَهُ فَضَائِلُ تَعْلُو سَادَةَ الأُمَمِ
مَضَى أَبُو الْحَارِثِ الْمَأْمُولُ نَائِلُهُ
وَالْمُحْتَشَى صَوْلُهُ فِي الْبَأْسِ وَالنَّقَمِ
هُوَ الرَّئِيْسُ الَّذِي لَا خَلْقَ يَعْدِلُهُ
يَحْمِي حِمَاهُ عَنِ الأَبْطَالِ بِالْعَلَمِ
الْعَامِرُ البَيْتِ بَيْتِ اللهِ يَمْلَؤُهُ
نُوْراً فَيَجْلُو كُسُوفَ الْقَحْطِ وَالظُّلَمِ
رَبُّ الفِرَاشِ بِصَحْنِ الْبَيْتِ تَكْرِمَةً
بِذَاكَ فُضِّلَ أَهْلُ الْفَخْرِ وَالْكَرَمِ

"The eyes have wept, and their tears have fallen like pearls, at the loss of Shayba, the house of religion and generosity. He was the brave one, the open-handed, singular in his mastery, possessed of virtues that rise above the lords of the nations. Abu al-Harith has departed, whose gift was hoped for, whose onslaught was feared in war and in retribution. He was the chief whom no creature equalled, guarding his sanctuary against champions with a banner raised. He was the keeper of the House, the House of Allah, filling it with light and dispelling the eclipse of drought and darkness. He was master of the mattress laid in the courtyard of the House in his honour, and by that were the people of pride and nobility distinguished."

The mattress here spoken of is the one that used to be spread for 'Abd al-Muttalib. It dated from the time of Qusayy ibn Kilab, spread for him and for the great men among his sons in honour and reverence.

Abu Talib also said, lamenting his father:

٧ بَكَتْ قُرَيْشٌ أَبَاهَا كُلُّهَا وَعَلَى
أَيَّامِهَا وَحِمَاهَا الثَّابِتِ الدِّعَمِ
٨ صَفِيُّ بَكِّي وَجُودِي بِالدُّمُوعِ لَهُ
وَأَسْعِدِي يَا أُمَيْمَ الْيَوْمَ بِالسَّحَمِ
٩ تُحِبُّكِ نِسْوَةُ رَهْطٍ مِنْ بَنِي أَسَدٍ
وَالْغُرِّ زُهْرَةَ بَعْدَ الْعُرْبِ وَالْعَجَمِ
١٠ أَلَمْ يَكُنْ زَيْنَ أَهْلِ الأَرْضِ كُلِّهِمِ
وَعِصْمَةَ الْخَلْقِ مِنْ عَادٍ وَمِنْ إِرَمِ

7. Quraysh wept, all of it, for its father, and for its days and its firmly pillared sanctuary.
8. O Safiyya, weep and be lavish with tears for him, and aid the mourning, O Umayma, this day with blackened grief.
9. The women of a clan of Banu Asad love you, and the radiant of Zuhra, after the Arabs and the non-Arabs.
10. Was he not the adornment of all the people of the earth, and the safeguard of creation, from 'Ad and from Iram?

Hudhayfa ibn Ghanim, the brother of Banu 'Adi ibn Ka'b ibn Lu'ayy, wept for 'Abd al-Muttalib ibn Hashim, recalling his excellence, and the excellence of Qusayy over Quraysh, and the excellence of his descendants over them:

أَعَيْنَيَّ جُوْدَا بِالدُّمُوعِ عَلَى الصَّدْرِ
وَلا تَسْأَمَا، أُسْقِيْتُمَا سَبَلَ الْقَطْرِ
وَجُوْدَا بِدَمْعٍ وَاسْفَحَا كُلَّ شَارِقٍ
بُكَاءَ امْرِئٍ لَمْ يُشْرِهِ نَائِبُ الدَّهْرِ
وَسُحَّا وَجُمَّا وَاسْجُمَا مَا بَقِيْتُمَا
عَلَى ذِي حَيَاءٍ مِنْ قُرَيْشٍ وَذِي سِتْرِ
عَلَى رَجُلٍ جَلْدِ الْقُوَى ذِي حَفِيْظَةٍ
جَمِيْلِ الْمُحَيَّا غَيْرِ نِكْسٍ وَلا هَذْرِ
عَلَى الْمَاجِدِ الْبُهْلُولِ ذِي الْبَاعِ وَالنَّدَى
رَبِيْعِ لُؤَيٍّ فِي الْقُحُوطِ وَفِي الْعُسْرِ
عَلَى خَيْرِ حَافٍ مِنْ مَعَدٍّ وَنَاعِلٍ
كَرِيْمِ الْمَسَاعِي طَيِّبِ الْخِيْمِ وَالنَّحْرِ
وَخَيْرِهِمُ أَصْلاً وَفَرْعاً وَمَعْدِناً
وَأَحْظَاهُمُ بِالْمَكْرُمَاتِ وَبِالذِّكْرِ
وَأَوْلَاهُمُ بِالْمَجْدِ وَالْحِلْمِ وَالنُّهَى
وَبِالْفَضْلِ عِنْدَ الْمُجْحِفَاتِ مِنَ الْغُبْرِ
عَلَى شَيْبَةِ الْحَمْدِ الَّذِي كَانَ وَجْهُهُ
يُضِيءُ سَوَادَ اللَّيْلِ كَالْقَمَرِ الْبَدْرِ
وَسَاقِي الْحَجِيْجِ ثُمَّ لِلْخُبْزِ هَاشِمٍ
وَعَبْدُ مَنَافٍ ذَلِكَ السَّيِّدُ الْفِهْرِي
طَوَى زَمْزَماً عِنْدَ الْمَقَامِ فَأَصْبَحَتْ
سِقَايَتُهُ فَخْرٌ عَلَى كُلِّ ذِي فَخْرِ
لِيَبْكِ عَلَيْهِ كُلُّ عَانٍ بِكُرْبَةٍ
وَآلِ قُصَيٍّ مِنْ مُقِلٍّ وَذِي وَفْرِ
بَنُوهُ سَرَاةٌ كَهْلُهُمْ وَشَبَابُهُمْ
تَفَلَّقُ عَنْهُمْ بَيْضَةُ الطَّائِرِ الصَّقْرِ
قُصَيٌّ الَّذِي عَادَى كِنَانَةَ كُلَّهَا
وَرَابَطَ بَيْتَ اللهِ فِي الْعُسْرِ وَالْيُسْرِ
فَإِنْ تَكُ غَالَتْهُ الْمَنَايَا وَصَرْفُهَا
فَقَدْ عَاشَ مَيْمُونَ النَّقِيْبَةِ وَالأَمْرِ
وَأَبْقَى رِجَالاً سَادَةً غَيْرَ عُزَّلٍ
مَصَالِيْتَ أَمْثَالَ الرُّدَيْنِيَّةِ السُّمْرِ
أَبُو عُتْبَةَ الْمُلْقِي إِلَيَّ حِبَاءَهُ
أَغَرُّ هِجَانُ اللَّوْنِ مِنْ نَفَرٍ غُرِّ
وَحَمْزَةُ مِثْلُ الْبَدْرِ يَهْتَزُّ لِلنَّدَى
نَقِيُّ الثِّيَابِ وَالذِّمَامِ مِنَ الْغَدْرِ
وَعَبْدُ مَنَافٍ مَاجِدٌ ذُو حَفِيْظَةٍ
وَصُولٌ لِذِي الْقُرْبَى رَحِيْمٌ بِذِي الصِّهْرِ
كُهُولُهُمُ خَيْرُ الْكُهُولِ وَنَسْلُهُمْ
كَنَسْلِ الْمُلُوكِ لا تَبُورُ وَلا تَحْرِي
مَتَى مَا تُلاقِي مِنْهُمُ الدَّهْرَ نَاشِئاً
تَجِدْهُ عَلَى إِجْرِيَّا وَالِدِهِ يَجْرِي
هُمُ مَلَؤُوا الْبَطْحَاءَ مَجْداً وَعِزَّةً
إِذَا اسْتُبِقَ الْخَيْرَاتُ فِي سَالِفِ الْعَصْرِ
وَفِيْهِمْ بُنَاةٌ لِلْعُلَا وَعِمَارَةٌ
وَعَبْدُ مَنَافٍ جَدُّهُمْ جَابِرُ الْكَسْرِ
ثَلاثَةَ أَيَّامٍ تَظَلُّ رِكَابُهُمْ
مُخَيَّسَةً بَيْنَ الأَخَاشِبِ وَالْحِجْرِ
لِكَيْ يَشْرَبَ الْحُجَّاجُ مِنْهَا وَغَيْرُهُمْ
إِذَا ابْتَدَرُوهَا صُبْحَ تَابِعَةِ النَّحْرِ
وَقِدْماً غَنِينَا قَبْلَ ذَلِكَ حِقْبَةً
وَلا نَسْتَقِي إِلاَّ بِحُمٍّ أَوِ الْحَفْرِ
وَهُمْ يَغْفِرُونَ الذَّنْبَ يُنْقَمُ دُونَهُ
وَيَعْفُونَ عَنْ قَوْلِ السَّفَاهَةِ وَالْهُجْرِ
وَهُمْ جَمَعُوا حِلْفَ الأَحَابِيشِ كُلِّهَا
وَهُمْ نَكَّلُوا عَنَّا غُوَاةَ بَنِي بَكْرٍ
فَخَارِجَ إِمَّا أَهْلِكَنَّ فَلا تَزَلْ
لَهُمْ شَاكِراً حَتَّى تُغَيَّبَ فِي الْقَبْرِ
بِإِنْكَاحِ عَوْفٍ بِنْتَهُ لِيُجِيْرَنَا
مِنَ أَعْدَائِنَا إِذْ أَسْلَمَتْنَا بَنُو فِهْرِ
فَسِرْنَا تِهَامِيَّ الْبِلادِ وَنَجْدَهَا
بِأَمْنِهِ حَتَّى خَاضَتِ الْعِيْرُ فِي الْبَحْرِ
وَهُمْ حَضَرُوا وَالنَّاسُ بَادٍ فَرِيْقُهُمْ
وَلَيْسَ بِهَا إِلاَّ نُوخُ بَنِي عَمْرِو
بَنَوْهَا دِيَاراً جَمَّةً وَطَوَوْا بِهَا
بِئَاراً تَسُحُّ الْمَاءَ مِنْ ثَبَجِ الْبَحْرِ

"O my two eyes, be lavish with tears upon my breast, and do not weary; may you be given the rain's outpouring. Be lavish with weeping and pour it forth at every dawn, the weeping of a man whom no turn of fate can console. Pour and stream and shed as long as you remain, over one of Quraysh possessed of modesty and of covering, over a man of firm strength and vigilance, fair of countenance, neither weak nor idle in speech, over the glorious and noble one, of long reach and open hand, the springtime of Lu'ayy in drought and in hardship, over the best of Ma'add, barefoot or shod, noble in his endeavours, of pure nature and generous in the slaughter, the best of them in root and branch and origin, and the most favoured of them in honours and in remembrance, the foremost of them in glory, forbearance and understanding, and in excellence when the dust-laden calamities fall, over Shayba al-Hamd, whose face lit the blackness of night like the full moon, the giver of water to the pilgrims, and then Hashim of the bread, and 'Abd Manaf, that lord of Fihr. He folded Zamzam beside the Maqam, and his giving of water became a pride above every man of pride. Let every one bound in distress weep for him, and the family of Qusayy, the poor among them and the wealthy. His sons are chiefs, their elders and their young; from them the falcon's egg was split open. Qusayy it was who stood against all Kinana and kept guard at the House of Allah in hardship and in ease. If the fates and their turning have carried him off, he lived blessed in resolve and in command, and he left behind men who are lords, not stripped of arms, keen blades like the tawny Rudayni spears. Abu 'Utba, who cast his gift toward me, radiant, pure of colour, of a noble company; and Hamza, like the full moon, quivering toward bounty, clean of garment and of pledge, free of treachery; and 'Abd Manaf, glorious and vigilant, joining the ties of kinship, merciful to the kinsman by marriage. Their elders are the best of elders, and their offspring like the offspring of kings, neither perishing nor failing. Whenever the age brings a youth of them before you, you find him running in his father's course. They filled al-Batha with glory and might when good deeds were vied for in the age gone by, and among them are builders of the heights and keepers of the sanctuary, and 'Abd Manaf their grandfather, the mender of what is broken. For three days their mounts remain penned between the rugged hills and the Hijr, so that the pilgrims may drink of it, and others besides them, when they hasten to it on the morning after the sacrifice. Long before that we lived an age in which we drew water only from brackish wells or from hollowed pits. They forgive the sin for which another would be punished, and they pardon the words of folly and abuse. They gathered the alliance of all the Ahabish, and they drove back from us the misguided of Banu Bakr. So go forth, and if I perish, do not cease to be thankful to them until you are hidden in the grave, for 'Awf's giving of his daughter in marriage, that he might protect us from our enemies when Banu Fihr surrendered us. Then we travelled the land of Tihama and its Najd in his safekeeping, until the caravan waded into the sea. They settled while the party of the people was still in the desert, and there was nothing there but the kneeling camels of Banu 'Amr. They built there many dwellings, and sank in them wells that pour out water from the deep of the sea."
