# Khadijah Proposes

The address ran:

> "الحمدُ للهِ الَّذِي جَعَلَنَا مِنْ ذُرِّيَّةِ إِبْراهِيْمَ -عليه السّلام-، وَزَرْعِ إِسْمَاعِيلَ، وَضِئْضِئِ مَعَدّ، وَعُنْصُرِ مُضَر، وَجَعَلَنَا مِنْ حَضَنَةِ بَيْتِهِ، وَسُوَّاسِ حَرَمِهِ، وَجَعَلَهُ لنا بَيْتاً مَحْجوجاً، وَحَرَماً آمِناً، وجَعَلَنَا الْحُكَّامَ على النَّاس."

"Praise be to Allah, who made us of the offspring of Abraham (ع), and of the sowing of Ishmael, of the stock of Ma'add and the element of Mudar, and made us the keepers of His House and the guardians of His sanctuary, and made it for us a House that is made pilgrimage to, and a secure sanctuary, and made us the judges over the people."

Then he turned to the matter for which the assembly had gathered:

> "ثُمَّ إِنَّ ابْنَ أَخِي هَذَا مُحَمَّد بن عبد الله، مَنْ لا يُوزَنُ بهِ رَجُلٌ إلاّ وَرَجَحَ بِهِ بِرّاً وَفَضْلاً، وحَزْماً وعَقْلاً، ومَحْتِداً ونُبْلاً، وإنْ كانَ في المالِ قُلٌّ، فَإِنَّ المالَ ظِلٌّ زائِلٌ، وَأَمْرٌ خَامِلٌ، ومحمَّدٌ مَنْ عرفتم نسبَه، وقرابتَه، وصِدْقَه، وأمانتَه، وَقَدْ خَطَبَ خَدِيْجَةَ بنتَ خُوَيْلِد، وَبَذَلَ لَها مِنْ الصَّدَاقِ ما عاجِلُهُ وآجِلُهُ مِنْ مالي، ومبلغُهُ كذا وكذا، وهو - والله - بعد هذا لَهُ نَبَأٌ عَظِيمٌ، وَخَطَرٌ جَلِيْلٌ."

"And this nephew of mine, Muhammad ibn Abdallah: no man is weighed against him but that he outweighs him in righteousness and merit, in resolve and intellect, in descent and nobility. And if his wealth be little, wealth is a passing shadow and a thing of no consequence. Muhammad is one whose lineage you know, and his kinship, his truthfulness and his trustworthiness. He has asked for the hand of Khadijah bint Khuwaylid, and there has been offered to her of the dowry that whose immediate portion and whose deferred portion are from my own wealth, its sum being such and such. And by Allah, after this he has great tidings and a mighty station."

It was said that he gave her as dowry twenty young she-camels, ten waqi of gold, a male slave and a female slave.

Khadijah was the most excellent of the wives of the Messenger of Allah. He married no other woman alongside her until she died, may Allah's mercy and His good pleasure be upon her, in reverence for her rank, in raising of her standing, and in honour to her. No woman among his wives equalled her in virtue nor came near her. All of his children were from her, save Ibrahim (ع), who was from Mariyah the Copt.

Those whom Khadijah bore to the Prophet were, first, the eldest of his children, al-Qasim, and by him he took his kunya, then al-Tayyib, then al-Tahir. His daughters from her were Ruqayyah, Zaynab, Umm Kulthum, and Fatimah (ع).

After the Messenger of Allah married her, she continued to see from him, and he would inform her of what had become abundant in him of the signs of prophethood and the proofs of the message. She would mention this to her cousin Waraqah ibn Nawfal, and he would give her good tidings of him and say: "By Allah, he is indeed the awaited Prophet." Waraqah ibn Nawfal died before the Messenger of Allah was sent. He was a poet, and whenever Khadijah told him what she witnessed of him and what the Messenger of Allah told her, he found the matter slow in coming and would say: when will he be raised up, that I may believe in him and hold him true.

Concerning that, Waraqah said:

> لَجَجْتُ وَكُنْتُ فِي الذِّكْرَى لَجُوجَا
> لِهَمٍّ طَالَمَا بَعَثَ النَّشِيْجَا
> وَوَصْفٍ مِنْ خَدِيْجَةَ بَعْدَ وَصْفٍ
> فَقَدْ طَالَ انْتِظَارِي يَا خَدِيْجَا
> بِبَطْنِ الْمَكَّتَيْنِ عَلَى رَجَائِي
> حَدِيْثَكِ أَنْ أَرَى مِنْهُ خُرُوجَا
> بِمَا خَبَّرْتِنَا مِنْ قَوْلِ قَسٍّ
> مِنَ الرُّهْبَانِ يَكْرَهُ أَنْ يَعُوجَا
> بِأَنَّ مُحَمَّداً سَيَسُودُ فِيْنَا
> وَيَخْصِمُ مَنْ يَكُونُ لَهُ حَجِيْجَا
> وَيُظْهِرُ فِي الْبِلاَدِ ضِيَاءَ عَدْلٍ
> يُقِيْمُ بِهِ الْبَرِيَّةَ أَنْ تَمُوجَا
> فَيَلْقَى مَنْ يُحَارِبُهُ خَسَاراً
> وَيَلْقَى مَنْ يُسَالِمُهُ فُلُوجَا
> فَيَا لَيْتِي إِذَا مَا كَانَ ذَاكُمُ
> شَهِدْتُ وَكُنْتُ أَوَّلَهُمْ وُلُوجَا
> وُلُوجاً فِي الَّذِي كَرِهَتْ قُرَيْشٌ
> وَلَوْ عَجَّتْ بِمَكَّتِهَا عَجِيْجَا
> أُرَجِّي بِالَّذِي كَرِهُوا جَمِيْعاً
> إِلَى ذِي الْعَرْشِ إِنْ سَفَلُوا عُرُوجَا
> وَهَلْ أَمْرُ السَّفَاهَةِ غَيْرُ كُفْرٍ
> بِمَنْ يَخْتَارُ مَنْ سَمَكَ الْبُرُوجَا
> فَإِنْ يَبْقَوْا وَأَبْقَ تَكُنْ أُمُورٌ
> يَضِجُّ الْكَافِرُونَ لَهَا ضَجِيْجَا
> وَإِنْ أَهْلِكْ فَكُلُّ فَتًى سَيَلْقَى
> مِنَ الأَقْدَارِ مَتْلَفَةً حَرُوجَا

I have persisted, and I was persistent in remembrance,
for a care that has long stirred up weeping;
and for a description from Khadijah after a description,
for my waiting has been long, O Khadijah.
In the hollow of the two Meccas, resting upon my hope,
is your account, that I might see him come forth;
and what you told us of the word of Quss,
of the monks, who refuses to swerve:
that Muhammad shall be master among us,
and shall overcome whoever disputes with him,
and shall make appear in the lands the light of justice
by which he steadies creation from surging.
Whoever wars against him shall meet loss,
and whoever makes peace with him shall meet triumph.
Would that I, when that comes to pass,
were a witness, and the first of them to enter in,
entering into that which Quraysh has hated,
though Mecca clamour with clamour.
By that which they all hated I hope
for an ascent to the Lord of the Throne, though they sink low.
And is the affair of folly anything but disbelief
in Him who chooses, who raised the constellations high?
If they remain and I remain, there shall be matters
over which the disbelievers cry out in outcry.
And if I perish, every young man shall meet
from the decrees a destroying and a straitening.
