# The Night Journey and the Fifty Prayers

When Islam had spread, the Messenger of Allah was carried by night from the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque, which is Bayt al-Maqdis in Aelia.

Abdullah ibn Mas'ud reported:

> "أُتي رسول الله بِالْبُراق -وهي الدَّابة التي كانت تُحْمَل عليها الأنبياء قبله، تضع حافرها في منتهى طرفها- فَحُمِلَ عليها، وأراه الله آياته بين السَّموات والأرض، ولَمَّا انتهى إلى بيت المقدس وجد فيه إِبْراهِيم ومُوسى وعِيْسَى في نفر من الأنبياء قد جُمِعوا له، فصلّى بهم."

"The Messenger of Allah was brought the Buraq, the beast that used to carry the prophets before him, which sets down its hoof at the farthest reach of its sight. He was mounted upon it, and Allah showed him His signs between the heavens and the earth. When he reached Bayt al-Maqdis he found there Ibrahim, Musa and 'Isa among a company of prophets who had been gathered for him, and he led them in prayer."

Abu Sa'id al-Khudri (رض) said that he heard the Messenger of Allah say:

> "لَمَّا فرغتُ مِمَّا كان في بيت المقدس، أُتي بالمعراج، ولم أَرَ شيئاً قَطُّ بِأَحْسَنَ مِنْهُ، فَأَصْعَدَنِي فِي السَّماوات."

"When I had finished what was to be done in Bayt al-Maqdis, the Mi'raj was brought, and I had never seen anything more beautiful than it, and it raised me through the heavens."

So Allah showed His Messenger the dazzling wonders of His signs and the marvels of what He had originated and created in His earth and His heavens. He rose to the highest horizon, and

> ﴿دَنَا فَتَدَّلَّى فَكَانَ قَابَ قَوْسَيْنِ أَوْ أَدْنَى﴾ [al-Najm: 8-9]

"Then he drew near and came down, and was at the distance of two bow-lengths or nearer."

Thus Allah made it plain in His Book, and addressed him with the most exalted address, and showed him the Garden and the Fire, and the stations of the angels and the prophets, and commanded the adhan.

It is related from Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father, from his grandfather, from al-Husayn ibn 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (عليهم السلام), that he was asked about what people say concerning the adhan, that its origin was a dream seen by 'Abdullah ibn Zayd, who told the Prophet of it, whereupon he commanded the adhan. Al-Husayn (ع) answered:

> "الوحي يتنَزَّل على نبيّكم، وتزعمون أنَّه أخذ الأذان عن عبد الله بن زَيْد! والأذان وجه دِینکم."

"Revelation was descending upon your Prophet, and you claim that he took the adhan from 'Abdullah ibn Zayd! The adhan is the very face of your religion."

He grew angry (ع) and then said that he had heard his father 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) say that Allah, mighty and majestic, sent down an angel who ascended with the Messenger of Allah. He recounted the hadith of the Isra' at length, and in it he said:

> "وبعث الله ملكاً لم يُرَ فِي السَّماءِ قبل ذلك الوقت ولا بعده، فأَذَّنَ مَثْنى وأقام مَثْنَى، وقال جَبْرَائِيْل للنَّبيّ: يا محمَّد؛ هكذا أَذِّن للصَّلاةِ."

"And Allah sent an angel the like of whom had not been seen in heaven before that time nor after it. He gave the call in pairs and the iqama in pairs, and he described the manner of the adhan, and Jibra'il said to the Prophet: O Muhammad, thus call to the prayer."

The Prophet also said:

> "لَمَّا أُسْرِيَ بِي إلى السَّماءِ قِيل لي: فِيْمَ اخْتَصَمَ الْمَلَأُ الأَعْلَى؟ قلتُ: لا أَدْرِي؛ فَعَلِّمْنِي. قيل: فِي إِسْبَاغِ الوُضُوءِ فِي السَّبَراتِ، ونقل الأَقْدام إلى الْجُمُعاتِ، وانتظار الصَّلاة بعد الصَّلاة."

"When I was taken by night to heaven, it was said to me: In what did the Highest Assembly dispute? I said: I do not know, so teach me. It was said: In performing the ablution fully in bitter cold, in carrying the feet to the Friday congregations, and in awaiting one prayer after another."

Concerning the making obligatory of the prayer, it is related from Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع) that he said:

> "فرض الله الصَّلاة؛ ففرضها خمسين صلاةً في اليوم واللّيلة، ثُمَّ رحم الله خلقه وَلَطَفَ بهم، فردَّهم إلى خمس صلوات."

"Allah made the prayer obligatory, and He made it obligatory as fifty prayers in the day and the night. Then Allah had mercy upon His creation and was gentle with them, and reduced them to five prayers."

The cause of this was that when Allah, mighty and majestic, took His Prophet Muhammad on the Night Journey, he passed by the prophets and not one of them questioned him, until he came to Musa, who questioned him and to whom he gave the account. Musa said to him:

> "ارْجِعْ إلى ربِّك، فاطْلُب إليه أن يُخَفِّف عن أُمَّتِكَ، فإِنِّي لم أزل أعرف من بني إسرائيل الطّاعة حتَّى نزلت الفرائض، فَأَنْكَرْتُهُمْ."

"Return to your Lord and ask Him to lighten the burden upon your community, for I never ceased to know obedience in the Children of Israel until the obligations came down, and then I found them changed."

So the Prophet returned and asked his Lord, and five prayers were taken from him. When he came again to Musa (ع) and told him, Musa said: "Return." He returned, and five more prayers were taken from him. Musa kept sending him back, and five after five were taken away, until they became five prayers, and the Messenger of Allah felt ashamed to go back once more to his Lord.

Then Abu 'Abdallah (ع) said:

> "جَزَى الله مُوسى عن هذه الأُمَّة خيراً."

"May Allah reward Musa well on behalf of this community."

It is mentioned from the Prophet that he said:

> "لَمَّا عرج بي إلى السَّماء رأيتُ ملكاً على صورة أخي عليّ بن أبي طالب، فقلتُ: يَا جَبْرَائِيْل؛ أَسَبَقَنِي أخي؟ قال: لا؛ ولكن الملائكة اشْتَاقَتْ إلى النَّظر إلى وجه عليّ، فخلق الله هذا الملك، متى اشتاقت إلى وجه عليّ نظرتْ إليه."

"When I was taken up to heaven I saw an angel in the likeness of my brother 'Ali ibn Abi Talib. I said: O Jibra'il, has my brother gone before me? He said: No, but the angels longed to look upon the face of 'Ali (ع), so Allah created this angel; whenever they long for the face of 'Ali they look upon it."

When morning came, the Prophet went out to the assembly of his people and informed them that Allah had taken him by night, and recounted to them the wonders he had seen. Some of them believed him and some called him a liar, and a group turned back from Islam when they heard it. So Allah, exalted be He, sent down concerning those who apostatized from Islam:

> ﴿وَمَا جَعَلْنَا الرُّؤْيَا الَّتِي أَرَيْنَاكَ إِلاَّ فِتْنَةً لِلنَّاسِ وَالشَّجَرَةَ الْمَلْعُونَةَ فِي الْقُرْآنِ وَنُخَوِّفُهُمْ فَمَا يَزِيدُهُمْ إِلاَّ طُغْيَانًا كَبِيرًا﴾ [al-Isra': 60]

"And We did not make the vision which We showed you except as a trial for the people, and the tree cursed in the Quran; and We frighten them, but it increases them only in great transgression."

It is related that 'A'isha bint Abi Bakr said:

> "ما باتَ رسول الله إِلاَّ بِين سَحْرِي وَنَحْرِي."

"The Messenger of Allah did not pass a night save between my breast and my throat."

Umm Hani bint Abi Talib said:

> "بات رسول الله ليلة الإسراء في بيتي، فنام ونمنا بعد صلاة العشاء الآخرة، ثُمَّ أَهَبَّنا رسول الله قبل طلوع الفجر، فلَمَّا صلّى الصُّبح وصلَّينا معه، حدَّثنا بحديث الإسراء."

"The Messenger of Allah passed the night of the Isra' in my house. He slept and we slept after the last 'Isha prayer, then the Messenger of Allah roused us before the breaking of dawn, and when he had prayed the dawn prayer and we had prayed with him, he told us the account of the Isra'."

When Quraysh denied his words, he brought them tokens of the road to Bayt al-Maqdis by which they knew that he had spoken the truth.

Throughout all of this the Messenger of Allah remained earnest and unwearied in calling to Allah, eager that Allah should guide His servants through him, and patient in what befell him.
