# The Year of Sorrow

The Year of Sorrow

Through all of it the Messenger of Allah remained earnest and unwearied, striving in his call to Allah, eager that Allah should guide His servants through him, and patient under the harm that came to him from his own people. The Book of Allah was descending upon him, revelation from Allah the Mighty and Majestic reached him at every hour, and the signs and the proofs bore witness for him.

The polytheists, for their part, laboured to obstruct him with whatever was hateful. They set snares for him and sought his ruin. They turned away from him whomever of their own people they were able to turn, and whomever came to him from outside their number, those to whom his news had travelled and who had heard of the appearance of his signs and his proofs.

His uncle Abu Talib stood firm in his support and in fighting on his behalf, so that no one reached the Prophet with harm except by abuse of the tongue and by insinuation. When his chest grew narrow, the Prophet would find rest with him, and when some affair from Quraysh fell heavily upon him, Abu Talib relieved him of his distress.

He found in Hamza (رض) likewise a great help and a vast benefit, and many of the reckless among Quraysh kept clear of him on Hamza's account.

When he withdrew to his house and told Khadijah what had befallen him, she consoled him in it, and he found rest with her. She spent upon him from her wealth and from all that her hands contained, and she served him with her own person. There was no one to whom he could turn, and with whom he could find a way out of what came upon him, like her, and like his uncle Abu Talib. Both of them died in a single year.

It is said that when death came upon Abu Talib, there came to him Abu Sufyan ibn Harb ibn Umayyah, 'Utbah and Shaybah the sons of Rabi'ah, Abu Jahl ibn Hisham, and Umayyah ibn Khalaf, among men of Banu 'Abd Shams and Banu Shaybah and those of Quraysh who followed them. They said to him: "O Abu Talib, you are among us in the standing you know, and there has come upon you of this affair what you see, and we fear for you. You know what stands between us and your nephew. Summon him, and take for him from us and for us from him, that he may hold back from us and we hold back from him."

So Abu Talib sent for the Messenger of Allah, and when he came, he told him of their words. The Messenger of Allah said:

> "نعم؛ كلمة واحدة يقولونها يملكون بها العربَ وتدين لهم بها العجمُ"

"Yes: one word which they say, by which they will possess the Arabs and by which the non-Arabs will render them obedience."

They said: "Yes, by your father, and ten words."

He said:

> "لا إله إلاَّ الله، وتَخْلَعون ما تعتقدون من دونه"

"Say: There is no god but Allah, and cast off what you hold to besides Him."

At that they clapped their hands and said: "Muhammad wants us to make the gods one god. Is this not an astonishing thing?"

Then Allah sent down concerning them, in the Quran:

> ﴿أَجَعَلَ الْآلِهَةَ إِلَهًا وَاحِدًا إِنَّ هَذَا لَشَيْءٌ عُجَابٌ ۝ وَانْطَلَقَ الْمَلَأُ مِنْهُمْ أَنِ امْشُوا وَاصْبِرُوا عَلَى آلِهَتِكُمْ إِنَّ هَذَا لَشَيْءٌ يُرَادُ ۝ مَا سَمِعْنَا بِهَذَا فِي الْمِلَّةِ الْآخِرَةِ إِنْ هَذَا إِلَّا اخْتِلَاقٌ﴾ [ص: ٥-٧]

"Has he made the gods one God? This is indeed a strange thing. And the chiefs among them walked away, saying: Walk on, and remain steadfast to your gods; this is a thing designed. We have not heard of this in the latter creed; this is nothing but an invention." And so to the end of the verses.

They dispersed from the presence of Abu Talib, and Abu Talib said to the Messenger of Allah:

> "والله ما سألتهم شططاً"

"By Allah, you did not ask of them anything unjust."

When he said this, the Messenger of Allah said to him:

> "فَقُلْ هذه الكلمة يا عَمِّ؛ أجد لكَ الوسيلة بها إلى الشَّفاعة عند الله"

"Then say this word, my uncle, and by it I shall find for you the means to intercession with Allah."

He said:

> "يا ابن أَخِي؛ لَوْ لاَ أَنْ يُقال أَنِّي جَزِعْتُ عند الموتِ لَقُلْتُهَا"

"O son of my brother, were it not that it would be said I lost heart at death, I would have said it."

They said: when the matter drew close to him, his lips moved, and al-'Abbas ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib bent his ear to him, then said:

> "والله يا ابن أخي؛ لقد قال أبو طالِبٍ ما سألته أن يقوله"

"By Allah, O son of my brother, Abu Talib has said what you asked him to say."

They claimed that the Prophet said:

> "لم أَسْمَعْهُ!"

"I did not hear it."

Abu Talib (رض) died, and his son 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) said in lament for him:

> أَبَا طَالِبٍ عِصْمَةُ الْمُسْتَجِيْرِ ... وَغَيْثُ الْمُحُولِ وَنُورُ الظُّلَمْ
> لَقَدْ هَدَّ فَقْدُكَ أَهْلَ الْحِفَاظِ ... فَصَلَّى عَلَيْكَ وَلِيُّ النِّعَمْ
> وَلَقَّاكَ رَبُّكَ رِضْوَانَهُ ... فَقَدْ كُنْتَ لِلْمُصْطَفَى خَيْرَ عَمْ
> تُجَاهِدُ مِنْ دُونِهِ الْمُشْرِكِيْنَ ... وَتُفْرِجُ عَنْ وَجْهِهِ كُلَّ غَمْ

Abu Talib, refuge of the one who seeks protection, rain of the drought-stricken and light amid the darknesses. Your loss has broken the people of fidelity; may the Master of all bounties bless you. May your Lord meet you with His good pleasure, for you were the best of uncles to the Chosen One, striving before him against the polytheists and driving every grief from his face.

And Hamza ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib (رض) said in lament for his brother Abu Talib:

> أَرِقْتُ لِنَوْحٍ آخِرَ اللَّيْلِ غَرَّدَا ... عَلَى غَفْلَةٍ يَنْعَى الرَّئِيْسَ الْمُسَدَّدا
> أَبَا طَالِبٍ مَأْوَى الصَّعَالِيْكِ وَالنَّدَى ... وَذَا الْحِلْمِ لاَ خُلْفاً وَلَمْ يَكُ قُعْدُدا
> أَخاً لَكَ خَلَّى ثُلْمَةً سَتَسُدُّهَا ... بَنُوْ هَاشِمٍ أَنْ تُسْتَبَاحَ وَتُضْهَدا
> أَمِيْنٌ عَلَى مَا اسْتَوْدَعَ اللهُ قَلْبَهُ ... وَإِنْ قَالَ قَوْلاً كَانَ فِيْهِ مُسَدَّدا
> فَأَمْسَتْ قُرَيْشٌ يَفْرَحُونَ لِفَقْدِهِ ... وَلَسْتَ تَرَى حَيّاً لِشَيْءٍ مُخَلَّدا
> رَجَاءَ أُمُورٍ زَيَّنَتْهَا حُلُومُهُمْ ... سَتُوْرِدُهُمْ يَوْماً مِنَ الْغَيِّ مَوْرِدا
> يُرَجُّونَ تَكْذِيْبَ النَّبِيِّ وَقَتْلَهُ ... وَأَنْ يُفْتَرَى بَهْتاً عَلَيْهِ وَيُجْحَدا
> كَذَبْتُمْ وَبَيْتِ اللهِ حَتَّى نُذِيْقَكُمْ ... صُدُورَ الْعَوَالِي وَالصَّفِيْحَ الْمُهَنَّدا
> وَيَبْدُو مِنَّا مَنْظَرٌ ذُوْ كَرِيْهَةٍ ... إِذَا مَا تَسَرْبَلْنَا الْحَدِيْدَ الْمُسَرَّدا
> فَإِمَّا تُبْدُونَا وَإِمَّا نُبْدُكُمْ ... وَإِمَّا تَرَوْا سِلْمَ الْعَشِيْرَةِ أَرْشَدا
> وَإِلاَّ فَإِنَّ الْحَيَّ دُونَ مُحَمَّدٍ ... بَنُوْ هَاشِمٍ خَيْرُ الْبَرِيَّةِ مَحْتِدا
> وَإِنَّ لَهُ مِنْكُمْ مِنَ اللهِ نَاصِراً ... وَلَسْتُ بِلاَقٍ صَاحِبَ اللهِ أَوْحَدا
> نَبِيٌّ أَتَى مِنْ كُلِّ حَيٍّ بِحُطَّةٍ ... وَسَمَّاهُ رَبِّي فِي الْكِتَابِ مُحَمَّدا
> أَغَرُّ كَأَنَّ الْبَدْرَ سُنَّةُ وَجْهِهِ ... جَلاَ الْغَيْمَ عَنْهُ ضَوْؤُهُ فَتَوَقَّدا

Sleep left him at a lamentation that sang out at the end of the night, mourning without warning the well-guided chief. Abu Talib, shelter of the destitute and of open-handedness, a man of forbearance, neither faithless nor of feeble descent. A brother who has left a breach which Banu Hashim must now close, lest they be made lawful prey and be oppressed. Trustworthy over what Allah deposited in his heart, and when he spoke a word he was rightly directed in it. Quraysh have come to rejoice at his loss, though no living thing is seen made immortal, hoping for matters which their own minds have adorned for them, and which will one day bring them to a watering place of ruin. They hope for the Prophet to be denied and killed, and for slander to be forged against him and for his truth to be rejected. You have lied, by the House of Allah, until we make you taste the points of the tall spears and the Indian blades, and there appears from us a sight of terror when we clothe ourselves in linked iron. Either you show yourselves to us, or we to you, or else you will see peace with the clan to be the better guidance. Otherwise the tribe standing before Muhammad is Banu Hashim, the noblest of creation in root. He has from Allah a helper against you, and no one is found who is alone as the friend of Allah is. A prophet who has come to every tribe with a plea for pardon, and my Lord named him in the Book: Muhammad. Radiant, as if the full moon were the very way of his face, his light clearing the cloud from him so that it blazed.

It is said that Khadijah bint Khuwaylid died three days after Abu Talib, and the Messenger of Allah was grieved by the affliction of losing her.

Abu Talib had been an arm and a stronghold for him in his affair, and a helper against his people. Khadijah used to console his cares, remove his sorrow, take upon herself his service with her own person, and clear away his distress.

It is narrated from Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn 'Ali ibn al-Husayn (ع) that he said: The Messenger of Allah said to Fatimah (ع):

> "إِنَّ جَبْرَائِيْل عهد إليّ أنَّ بيت أمّكِ خَدِيْجَة بنت خُوَيْلِد بين بيت مَرْيَم بنت عِمْران وبين بيت آسِيَة امرأة فِرْعون، من لُؤْلُؤَة جَوْفاء لا صَخَبَ فيها ولا نَصَبَ"

"Gabriel has given me the covenant that the house of your mother Khadijah bint Khuwaylid is between the house of Maryam bint 'Imran and the house of Asiyah the wife of Pharaoh, of a hollowed pearl, wherein is neither clamour nor toil."

The Messenger of Allah used to say:

> "ما اغتممتُ بِغَمٍّ أيَّامَ حياةِ أبي طالِبٍ وخَدِيْجَةَ"

"No grief oppressed me during the days of the life of Abu Talib and Khadijah." For Abu Talib defended him, and Khadijah consoled him and gave him patience and made light for him what he met with for the sake of Allah.

The affair of Abu Talib weighed heavily upon the Messenger of Allah, and his sorrow for him was severe. The reckless among Quraysh stretched out toward him once Abu Talib had died, and reached him with harm. The standing of Banu Hashim weakened after Abu Talib, and the Messenger of Allah used to say:

> "مَا نالَتْ مِنِّي قُرَيْشٌ شَيْئاً أَكْرَهُهُ حَتَّى مَاتَ أَبُو طَالِبٍ"

"Quraysh never got from me anything I disliked until Abu Talib died."

After Abu Talib there remained for the Messenger of Allah no one with whom he could find rest and companionship, and with whom his cares were relieved, other than 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع). When 'Ali reached the stature of men, he was under the guardianship of the Messenger of Allah, and Allah the Mighty and Majestic strengthened him by 'Ali, and singled 'Ali out for his brotherhood and his succession. After the death of his father, the Prophet would find rest with him and rely upon him in his affairs.

The enemies of the Prophet grew many and harmed him, brought cares upon him, and called him a liar, while Allah the Exalted kept their evil from him and sufficed him against their scheming. As for the harm, that he met from them.

The Messenger of Allah went out to Thaqif seeking their support. When he reached them, he sat in their assembly and called them to Allah, and spoke to them of what he had come for: their aid for Islam and their standing with him against those of his people who opposed him.

He heard from them harm and denial, and he rose from among them having despaired of any good in them. He asked them to conceal his affair, so that word of it should not reach his people and they revile him. They did not do so. They incited against him their fools and their slaves, who insulted him and shouted at him, until the people gathered upon him and drove him to take refuge at a wall belonging to 'Utbah and Shaybah, the sons of Rabi'ah, who were both inside it; and those of the fools of Thaqif who had been following him turned back from him.

Then the Messenger of Allah said:

> "اللَّهُمَّ إِلَيْكَ أَشْكُوْ ضَعْفَ قُوَّتِي، وقِلَّةَ حِيْلَتِي، وهَوانِي على النَّاسِ، يا أَرْحَمَ الرَّاحِمِينَ، أَنْتَ رَبُّ الْمُسْتَضْعَفِينَ، وَأَنْتَ رَبِّي، إلى مَنْ تَكِلُنِي؟ إلى بعيدٍ يَتَجَهَّمُنِي؟ أَمْ إلى عَدُوٍّ مَلَّكْتَهُ أَمْرِي؟ إِنْ لَمْ يَكُنْ بِكَ عَلَيَّ غَضَبٌ فلا أُبالِي، ولكنَّ عافيتَكَ هي أوسعُ لِي. أَعُوذُ بِنُورِ وجهكَ الَّذي أشرقتْ له الظُّلماتُ، وصَلَحَ عليه أمرُ الدُّنيا والآخرةِ، مِنْ أَنْ تُنْزِلَ بِي غَضَبَكَ، أو تُحِلَّ عَلَيَّ سُخْطَكَ، لكَ العُتْبَى حَتَّى تَرْضَى، ولا حولَ ولا قوَّةَ إِلاَّ بِكَ"

"O Allah, to You I complain of the weakness of my strength, the paucity of my resource, and my lowliness before the people. O Most Merciful of the merciful, You are the Lord of the oppressed, and You are my Lord. To whom do You entrust me? To a distant one who scowls at me? Or to an enemy whom You have given power over my affair? If there is no anger from You upon me, I do not care, but Your well-being is more ample for me. I seek refuge in the light of Your face, by which the darknesses are illumined and by which the affair of this world and the next is set right, from Your sending down Your anger upon me or Your causing Your displeasure to alight upon me. To You belongs the seeking of favour until You are pleased. There is no power and no strength except by You."

When the two sons of Rabi'ah, 'Utbah and Shaybah, saw him and what he had met with, their kinship stirred for him. They called a Christian servant of theirs named 'Addas and said to him: "Take a cluster of these grapes, put it on this dish, then carry it to that man and tell him to eat of it."

'Addas did so. He came forward and set it before the Messenger of Allah and said to him: "Eat."

When the Messenger of Allah put his hand to it he said:

> "بسم الله"

"In the name of Allah." Then he ate. 'Addas looked into his face and said: "By Allah, this is speech the people of this land do not know."

The Messenger of Allah said to him: "And from the people of which land are you, 'Addas, and what is your religion?" He said: "I am a Christian, a man of the people of Nineveh."

The Messenger of Allah said: "From the town of the righteous man Yunus ibn Matta?"

'Addas said to him: "And what makes you know what Yunus ibn Matta is?"

The Messenger of Allah said:

> "ذلك أخي؛ كان نبيّاً وأنا نبيّ"

"That is my brother. He was a prophet, and I am a prophet."

Then 'Addas bent over the feet of the Messenger of Allah, kissing them, and kissed his head and his hands and his feet.

One of the two sons of Rabi'ah said to his brother: "As for this servant of yours, he has already been corrupted against you."

When 'Addas came to them they said to him: "Woe to you, 'Addas! What is the matter with you, kissing that man's head and his hands and his feet?" He said: "My master, there is nothing on the earth better than this man. He has told me of a matter which none knows except the prophets."

They said to him: "Woe to you, 'Addas. Let him not turn you from your religion."
