# First Raids and the Sacred Month

In that season the Messenger of Allah sent out his uncle Hamzah (رض) to the shore of the sea in the region of al-'Ais with thirty riders from among the Muhajireen, and he appointed him over them. The banner bound for Hamzah ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib, the uncle of the Messenger of Allah, was the first banner ever tied in Islam.

Word of it reached Quraysh, and they sent out against him three hundred riders under Abu Jahl ibn Hisham. The two parties came within sight of one another and were near to fighting, but Majdi ibn 'Amr al-Juhani placed himself between them, for he held a truce with both sides, and they parted without battle. Hamzah (ع) turned back, and with him those of the Muhajireen who had gone out.

Concerning that day Hamzah (رض) said:

أَلاَ يَا لَقَوْمِي لِلتَّحَلُّمِ وَالْجَهْلِ
وَلِلنَّقْصِ مِنْ رَأْيِ الرِّجَالِ وَلِلْعَقْلِ
وَلِلرَّاكِبِيْنَا بِالْمَظَالِمِ لَمْ تَطَأْ
لَهُمْ حُرُمَاتٍ مِنْ سَوَامٍ وَلاَ أَهْلِ
كَأَنَّا تَبَلْنَاهُمْ وَلاَ تَبْلَ عِنْدَنَا
لَهُمْ غَيْرُ أَمْرٍ بِالْعَفَافِ وَبِالْعَدْلِ
وَأَمْرٍ بِإِسْلاَمٍ فَلاَ يَقْبَلُونَهُ
وَيَنْزِلُ مِنْهُمْ مِثْلَ مَنْزِلَةِ الْهَزْلِ
فَمَا بَرِحُوا حَتَّى انْتَدَبْتُ لِغَارَةٍ
لَهُمْ حَيْثُ حَلُّوا أَبْتَغِي رَاحَةَ الفَضْلِ
بِأَمْرِ رَسُولِ اللهِ أَوَّلَ خَافِقٍ
عَلَيْهِ لِوَاءٌ لَمْ يَكُنْ لاَحَ مِنْ قَبْلِي
لِوَاءٌ لَدَيْهِ النَّصْرُ مِنْ ذِي كَرَامَةٍ
إِلَهٍ عَزِيزٍ فِعْلُهُ أَفْضَلُ الْفِعْلِ
عَشِيَّةَ سَارُوا حَاشِدِيْنَ وَكُلُّنَا
مَرَاجِلُهُ مِنْ غَيْظِ أَصْحَابِهِ تَغْلِي
فَلَمَّا تَرَاءَيْنَا أَنَاخُوا فَعَقَّلُوا
مَطَايَا وَعَقَّلْنَا مَدَى غَرَضِ النَّبْلِ
فَقُلْنَا لَهُمْ: حَبْلُ الإِلَهِ نَصِيرُنَا
وَمَا لَكُمُ إِلَّا الضَّلاَلَةُ مِنْ حَبْلِ
فَثَارَ أَبُو جَهْلٍ هُنَالِكَ بَاغِياً
فَخَابَ وَرَدَّ اللهُ كَيْدَ أَبِي جَهْلِ
وَمَا نَحْنُ إِلَّا فِي ثَلاثِيْنَ رَاكِباً
وَهُمْ مِئَتَانِ بَعْدَ وَاحِدَةٍ فَضْلِ
أَفَيَالَ لُؤَيٍّ لاَ تُطِيْعُوا غُوَاتَكُمْ
وَفِيئُوا إِلَى الإِسْلاَمِ وَالْمَنْهَجِ السَّهْلِ
فَإِنِّي أَخَافُ أَنْ يُصَبَّ عَلَيْكُمُ
عَذَابٌ فَتَدْعُوا بِالنَّدَامَةِ وَالثُّكْلِ

"O my people, this is for forbearance and for ignorance, and for the deficiency of men's judgment and of reason. Riders came against us with wrongs, though we had trodden upon no sanctity of theirs, neither of pasturing flocks nor of household. It is as though we had wronged them, though no wrong of ours lay against them, but only a command to chastity and to justice, and a summons to Islam which they would not accept, and which fell among them as a jest falls. They did not cease until I was appointed to a raid against them wherever they had settled, seeking the ease of Allah's bounty, by the command of the Messenger of Allah, the first banner that fluttered and that never shone before me: a banner whose victory is from the One of nobility, a Mighty God whose deed is the most excellent of deeds. On the evening they marched in a gathered host, and all of us were there, their cauldrons boiling with the rage of their companions. When we came in sight of one another they knelt their beasts and hobbled their mounts, and we hobbled ours within the reach of an arrow's aim. We said to them: the rope of God is our helper, and you have no rope but misguidance. Abu Jahl rose there in insolence, and he was disappointed, and Allah turned back the guile of Abu Jahl. We were no more than thirty riders, and they were two hundred and one over. O clans of Lu'ayy, do not obey your reckless ones; return to Islam and to the easy path, for I fear that a punishment be poured upon you, and then you will call out in remorse and bereavement."

Then the Messenger of Allah went out against Quraysh in the month of Rabi' al-Awwal, and the Muhajireen and the Ansar went out with him. He reached Buwat in the region of Radwa, then returned to Madinah without meeting any hostility. He remained there through the rest of Rabi' al-Akhir and part of Jumada al-Ula.

He then went out against Quraysh until he came to al-'Ushayrah in the valley of Yanbu'. He stayed there for part of Jumada al-Ula and some nights of Jumada al-Akhirah, then returned to Madinah without meeting any hostility.

On that expedition 'Ali (ع) and 'Ammar ibn Yasir had lain down upon a patch of dust and slept, and the Messenger of Allah roused them and said to 'Ali (ع):

"مَا لَكَ يا أبا تُراب؟"

"What is the matter with you, O Abu Turab?"

Then he said:

"أَلاَ أُحَدِّثُكُما بِأَشْقَى النَّاسِ رَجُلَيْنِ؟"

"Shall I not tell you both of the two most wretched of men?"

They said: "Yes, O Messenger of Allah." He said:

"أُحَيْمِرُ ثَمُودَ الَّذِي عَقَرَ النَّاقَةَ، وَأَشْقَى الآخِرِينَ الَّذِي يَضْرِبُكَ يا عَلِيُّ عَلَى هَذِهِ حَتَّى يَبُلَّ مِنْهَا هَذِهِ"

"The ruddy one of Thamud, who hamstrung the she-camel; and the most wretched of the later ones is he who will strike you, O 'Ali, upon this," and he placed his hand upon the crown of his head, "until this is soaked from it," and he took hold of his beard.

The Messenger of Allah returned to Madinah, and there had been no fighting.

He sent Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas with eight men of the Muhajireen, and they went out until they reached al-Kharrar in the land of the Hijaz, then returned, and there was no fighting.

Kurz ibn Jabir al-Fihri raided the grazing herds of Madinah, and the Messenger of Allah went out in pursuit of him until he came to Badr. Kurz ibn Jabir escaped him, and the Messenger of Allah returned to Madinah. That expedition is called the First Badr.

The Messenger of Allah then charged 'Abdullah ibn Jahsh with a company of eight men and said to him:

"امْضِ حَتَّى تَنْزِلَ نَخْلَةَ، فَتَرَصَّدْ قُرَيْشاً"

"Go on until you halt at Nakhlah," which lies between Makkah and al-Ta'if, "and lie in wait for Quraysh."

He set out with those who were with him. When he had traveled two days he said to his companions: "I am going on with that for which the Messenger of Allah sent me. Whoever desires martyrdom and longs for it, let him march on; and whoever dislikes that, let him return." So Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas and 'Utbah ibn Ghazwan turned back, and he marched on with those who remained with him.

When he halted at Nakhlah, where the Messenger of Allah had commanded him, he came upon a caravan of Quraysh carrying raisins and hides. 'Abdullah ibn Jahsh and his companions fell upon the polytheists who were with the caravan. They took captive from among the polytheists 'Uthman ibn 'Abdullah and al-Hakam ibn Kaysan, killed 'Amr ibn al-Hadrami, and seized the caravan, bringing it to the Messenger of Allah, who took possession of the caravan and the two captives.

Quraysh sent a ransom for 'Uthman ibn 'Abdullah and al-Hakam ibn Kaysan. As for al-Hakam ibn Kaysan, he accepted Islam and remained with the Messenger of Allah until he was killed on the day of the well of Ma'unah. As for 'Uthman ibn 'Abdullah, he rejoined Makkah and died there a disbeliever.

The Messenger of Allah then turned to what 'Abdullah ibn Jahsh had brought, and after taking the fifth from it he gave four fifths to the people of that expedition.

Ibn al-Hadrami was the first man slain by the Muslims, and that took place in the sacred month. Concerning it Allah, exalted is He, says:

﴿يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الشَّهْرِ الْحَرَامِ قِتَالٍ فِيهِ قُلْ قِتَالٌ فِيهِ كَبِيرٌ﴾ [البقرة: ٢١٧]

"They ask you about the sacred month, about fighting in it. Say: fighting in it is grave," to the end of the verse.

Quraysh said: Muhammad and his companions have made the sacred month lawful and have shed blood in it.

Then 'Abdullah ibn Jahsh said:

تَعُدُّونَ قَتْلاً فِي الْحَرَامِ عَظِيْمَةً
وَأَعْظَمُ مِنْهُ لَوْ يَرَى الرُّشْدَ رَاشِدُ
صُدُودُكُمُ عَمَّا يَقُولُ مُحَمَّدٌ
وَكُفْرٌ بِهِ واللهُ رَاءٍ وَشَاهِدُ
وَإِخْرَاجُكُمْ مِنْ مَسْجِدِ اللهِ أَهْلَهُ
لِئَلاَّ يُرَى فِي الْبَيْتِ لِلَّهِ سَاجِدُ
فَإِنَّا وَإِنْ عَيَّرْتُمُونَا بِقَتْلِهِ
وَأَرْجَفَ بِالإِسْلامِ بَاغٍ وَحَاسِدُ
سَقَيْنَا مِنَ ابْنِ الْحَضْرَمِيِّ رِمَاحَنَا
بِنَخْلَةَ لَمَّا أَوْقَدَ الْحَرْبَ وَاقِدُ
دَمَاً، وَابْنُ عَبْدِ اللهِ عُثْمَانُ بَيْنَنَا
يُنَازِعُهُ غُلٌّ مِنَ الْقَدِّ عَانِدُ

"You count a killing in the sacred month a great matter, yet greater than it, if any rightly guided one could see the right, is your turning away from what Muhammad says and your disbelief in him, while Allah sees and bears witness; and your driving the people of Allah's mosque out of it, so that none may be seen prostrating to Allah in the House. As for us, though you revile us for his killing, and though the insolent and the envious have spread alarm against Islam, we gave our spears to drink of the blood of Ibn al-Hadrami at Nakhlah, when the kindler had kindled the war; and 'Uthman ibn 'Abdullah is among us, wrestling with a stubborn fetter of hide."
