# Reprisals: Suwaiq, Qaynuqa, and Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf

When the Messenger of God returned to Madinah, he remained there only seven nights before setting out against Banu Sulaym at al-Kudr. He led the expedition himself, making for Banu Sulaym, and reached a watering place of theirs called al-Kudr. He camped there three nights, then returned to Madinah without meeting any hostility. He remained in Madinah for the rest of Shawwal and through Dhu al-Qa'dah, and during that stay he ransomed most of the captives of Quraysh.

Then came the expedition of al-Suwaiq. When the remnant of Quraysh returned from Badr to Mecca, Abu Sufyan ibn Harb swore an oath that no water would touch his head from ritual impurity until he had raided Muhammad. Abu Sufyan set out with two hundred riders of Quraysh to fulfil his oath, taking the Najdiyyah road, until he halted at the head of a watercourse near a mountain called Tayb, at a post's distance or thereabouts from Madinah. He then rode out under cover of night until he came to Banu al-Nadir. He went to Huyayy ibn Akhtab and knocked at his door, but Huyayy refused to open to him out of fear, so Abu Sufyan turned away from him to Sallam ibn Mishkam, who was the wealthiest of Banu al-Nadir. Sallam admitted him, gave him food and drink, and informed him of the news of the people.

Abu Sufyan departed in the last part of the night and rejoined his companions. When morning came they descended upon a district called al-'Urayd, where they burned some enclosures of palm trees, and they came upon two men of the Ansar working in a field of theirs and killed them both, and then turned back in retreat.

The people were alerted, and the Messenger of God went out in pursuit of them until he reached Qarqarat al-Kudr, then returned, having missed Abu Sufyan and his companions. In their flight the raiders had cast away their provisions, most of which was suwaiq, parched barley meal, and the Muslims found a great quantity of it. For that reason the expedition was named the expedition of al-Suwaiq.

Then came the expedition of Dhu Amr. The Messenger of God marched out toward Najd, intending Ghatafan, and remained in Najd for the whole of Safar, then returned to Madinah without meeting any resistance. He then stayed in Madinah the whole of Rabi' al-Awwal, or all but a little of it.

Then came the expedition of al-Furu' at Buhran. The Messenger of God set out seeking Quraysh until he reached Buhran in the region of al-Furu'. He remained there through Rabi' al-Akhir and Jumada al-Ula, then returned to Madinah without meeting any hostility.

Then came the affair of Banu Qaynuqa'. They were of the Jews, and the Messenger of God had concluded a covenant of peace with them. When the encounter at Badr took place, the Messenger of God gathered them in the market of Banu Qaynuqa' and said to them:

"يَا مَعْشَرَ يَهُودَ؛ احْذَرُوا مِنْ اللهِ مِثْلَ مَا نَزَلَ بِقُرَيْشٍ مِنْ النَّقْمَةِ، وَأَسْلِمُوا، فَإِنَّكُمْ قَدْ عَرَفْتُمْ أَنِّي نَبِيٌّ مُرْسَلٌ، تَجِدُونَ ذَلِكَ فِي كِتَابِكُمْ وَعَهْدِ اللهِ إِلَيْكُمْ"

"O assembly of Jews, beware of God, lest there come down upon you the like of the retribution that came down upon Quraysh. Embrace Islam, for you have known that I am a prophet sent by God. You find that in your own scripture and in the covenant of God with you."

They said: "O Muhammad, you suppose that we are your people. Do not let it deceive you that you met a folk who had no knowledge of war and that you seized an opportunity against them. By God, if we make war on you, you will surely know that we are the men."

It is said that concerning them God, mighty and majestic, revealed:

﴿قُل لِّلَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا سَتُغْلَبُونَ وَتُحْشَرُونَ إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ وَبِئْسَ الْمِهَادُ ۝ قَدْ كَانَ لَكُمْ آيَةٌ فِي فِئَتَيْنِ الْتَقَتَا فِئَةٌ تُقَاتِلُ فِي سَبِيلِ اللهِ وَأُخْرَى كَافِرَةٌ يَرَوْنَهُم مِّثْلَيْهِمْ رَأْيَ الْعَيْنِ وَاللهُ يُؤَيِّدُ بِنَصْرِهِ مَن يَشَاءُ إِنَّ فِي ذَلِكَ لَعِبْرَةً لِأُولِي الأَبْصَارِ﴾

"Say to those who disbelieve: you will be overcome and gathered into Hell, and evil is the resting place. There was already a sign for you in the two forces that met: one fighting in the cause of God and another disbelieving; they saw them with their own eyes as twice their number. And God strengthens with His victory whom He wills. In that is a lesson for those who have sight." [Āl 'Imrān: 12 and 13]

As for the cause of the war between them and the Muslims, a man of theirs afterward committed an offense in their market against a Muslim woman, and she cried out. A man of the Muslims sprang upon him and killed the Jew, whereupon the Jews fell upon the Muslim and killed him. The people of the slain Muslim called the Muslims to their aid, and the Messenger of God went out against them and besieged them fifteen nights. The Commander of the Faithful and the champions of the Muslims assembled, and 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) said:

"يا رسول الله؛ لندخلنَّ عليهم عَنْوَة"

"O Messenger of God, let us force our way in upon them."

So they came down to the judgment of the Messenger of God, and God gave him power over them. But 'Abd Allah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul, who was one of the chiefs of the hypocrites, intervened on their behalf and stood in their defense, saying to the Messenger of God:

"لا أدعْ لك أربع مئة حاسر، وثلاث مئة دارع. قد منعوني من الأسود والأحمر"

"I will not abandon to you four hundred without mail and three hundred in armor. They have defended me against the black and the red alike."

The Messenger of God said:

"هُمْ لَكَ"

"They are yours."

Then came the raiding party of Zayd ibn Haritha. The Messenger of God dispatched him on a raid, and he fell upon a caravan of Quraysh in which Abu Sufyan ibn Harb was travelling, carrying a great quantity of silver. The men escaped him by flight, and he brought the caravan to the Messenger of God. Quraysh had grown afraid of the road they used to take to Syria after the encounter at Badr, so they had taken the road of Iraq, and it was on that road that Zayd ibn Haritha seized the caravan.

Hassan ibn Thabit said, rebuking Quraysh for taking that road:

دَعُوا فَلَحَاتِ الشَّامِ قَدْ حَالَ دُوْنَهَا
ضِرَابٌ كَأَفْوَاهِ الْمَخَاضِ الْأَوَارِكِ
بِأَيْدِي رِجَالٍ هَاجَرُوا نَحْوَ رَبِّهِمْ
وَأَنْصَارِهِ حَقّاً وَأَيْدِي الْمَلاَئِكِ
إِذَا سَلَكَتْ بِالغَوْرِ مِنْ رَمْلِ عَالِجٍ
فَقُولاَ لَهَا لَيْسَ الطَّرِيْقُ هُنَالِكِ

"Leave the tilled lands of Syria, for there stands between you and them a striking like the mouths of the pregnant camels at pasture, at the hands of men who migrated toward their Lord and of His helpers in truth, and at the hands of the angels. If she takes the lowland road through the sands of 'Alij, then say to her: the way does not lie there."

Then came the killing of Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf. He was a man of Tayyi', of the clan of Banu Nabhan, and his mother was of Banu al-Nadir. When the men of Badr were struck down and the news reached him, he said:

"أترون محمَّداً قتل أشراف العرب وملوك النَّاس، والله إنْ كان محمَّد قد أصاب هؤلاءِ، لَبَطْنُ الأرض خير من ظهرها"

"Do you see that Muhammad has killed the nobles of the Arabs and the kings of men? By God, if Muhammad has truly struck down these men, then the belly of the earth is better than its back."

Of this a poet said:

شِبْهَ الْكُلَيْبِ إِلَى الْكُلَيْبَةِ يَتْبَعُ
فَابْكِي فَقَدْ أَبْكَيْتَ عَبْداً رَاضِعاً
وَأَهَانَ قَوْماً قَاتَلُوهُ وَصُرِّعُوا
وَلَقَدْ شَفَى الرَّحْمَنُ مِنَّا سَيِّداً
وَنَجَا وَأُخْلِيَ مِنْهُمُ مَنْ قَلْبُهُ شَغَفٌ يَظَلُّ لِخَوْفِهِ يَتَصَدَّعُ

"Like a little dog trailing after a bitch. So weep, for you have made a suckling slave weep. He humiliated a people who fought him and were laid low, and the Merciful has healed through us a chief. He escaped, and there was emptied of them one whose heart was pierced with longing, splitting apart out of its fear."

Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf returned to Madinah and there composed amorous verses about the women of the Muslims until he had injured them. The Messenger of God said:

"من لي بابْنِ الأَشْرَف؟"

"Who will deal with Ibn al-Ashraf for me?"

Muhammad ibn Maslamah al-Ansari said to him: "I will deal with him for you, O Messenger of God. I will kill him." He said:

"اِفْعَلْ ذَلِكَ إِنْ قَدَرْتَ عَلَيْهِ"

"Do that, if you are able."

Muhammad ibn Maslamah said: "O Messenger of God, we shall have to say things." He said:

"قُولُوا مَا بَدَا لَكُمْ فَأَنْتُمْ فِي حِلٍّ مِنْ ذَلِكَ"

"Say whatever seems good to you, for you are absolved in that."

There volunteered with him in this Silkan ibn Salamah, one of Banu 'Abd al-Ashhal, who was the milk-brother of Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf, and 'Abbad ibn Bishr, and al-Harith ibn Aws, these being of Banu 'Abd al-Ashhal, and Abu 'Abs ibn Jabr of Banu Haritha. They then set out toward the enemy of God, Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf, and before the others came to him his milk-brother Silkan ibn Salamah went to him alone. The two talked for a while and recited poetry to one another, and then Silkan said: "O Ibn al-Ashraf, you know the coming of this man among us," meaning the Messenger of God, "and what a trial it has been. The Arabs have become our enemies on his account, and the roads have been cut off from us, until our families are ruined."

When Ka'b had grown certain of the news of Badr he had been seized with distress and had gone out to Mecca, inciting the people against the Messenger of God, reciting verses and weeping for the men of the pit from Quraysh who were struck down at Badr. Among what he said:

طَحَنَتْ رَحَى بَدْرٍ لِمَهْلِكِ أَهْلِهِ
وَلِمِثْلِ بَدْرٍ تَسْتَهِلُّ وَتَدْمَعُ
لاَ تَبْعَدُوا إِنَّ الْمُلُوكَ تُصَرَّعُ
ذِي بَهْجَةٍ يَأْوِي إِلَيْهِ الضُّيَّعُ
كَمْ قَدْ أُصِيْبَ بِهِ مِنْ أَبْيَضٍ مَاجِدٍ
حَمَّالِ أَثْقَالٍ يَسُودُ وَيَرْبَعُ
طَلْقِ الْيَدَيْنِ إِذَا الْكَوَاكِبُ أَخْلَفَتْ
إِنَّ ابْنَ الأَقْرَفِ ظَلَّ كَعْباً يَجْرَعُ
وَيَقُولُ أَقْوَامٌ أُسَرُّ بِسُخْطِهِمْ
ظَلَّتْ تَسُوخُ بِأَهْلِهَا وَتُصَدَّعُ
صَدَقُوا فَلَيْتَ الأَرْضَ سَاعَةَ قُتِّلُوا
أَوْ عَاشَ أَعْمَى مُرْعَشاً لاَ يَسْمَعُ
صَارَ الَّذِي أَثَرَ الْحَدِيْثَ بِطَعْنَةٍ
خَشَعُوا لِقَتْلِ أَبِي الْحَكِيْمِ وَجُدِّعُوا
تُنُبِّئْتُ أَنَّ بَنِي الْمُغِيْرَةِ كُلَّهُمْ
مَا نَالَ مِثْلَ الْمُهْلَكِيْنَ وَتُبَّعُ
وَابْنَا رَبِيْعَةَ عِنْدَهُ وَمُنَبِّهٌ
قُتِلَتْ سَرَاةُ النَّاسِ حَوْلَ حِيَاضِهِمْ
فِي النَّاسِ يَبْنِي الصَّالِحَاتِ وَيَجْمَعُ
تُنُبِّئْتُ أَنَّ الْحَارِثَ بْنَ هِشَامِهِمْ
لِيَزُورَ يَثْرِبَ بِالْجُمُوعِ وَإِنَّمَا
يَحْمِي عَلَى الْحَسَبِ الْكَرِيْمُ الأَرْوَعُ

"The mill of Badr ground for the destruction of its people, and for the like of Badr the eye brims over and weeps. Do not be far off, for kings too are laid low. Many a noble white-faced man was struck down there, of splendid bearing, to whom the destitute came for refuge, a bearer of heavy burdens, who led and prospered, open-handed when the stars withheld their rain. The son of the base one has left Ka'b swallowing his grief. Peoples say what they say, and I am gladdened by their anger. She kept sinking with her people and splitting apart. They spoke truly. Would that the earth in the hour they were slain, or that a man had lived on blind and palsied, unhearing. He who brought the report has become a wound of the spear. They were humbled by the killing of Abu al-Hakim and were maimed. I have been told that the sons of al-Mughirah, all of them, and Tubba' too, attained nothing like those who perished. The two sons of Rabi'ah are with him, and Munabbih. The nobles of the people were killed around their watering places. Among men he built up good works and gathered them. I have been told that al-Harith, their son of Hisham, would visit Yathrib with the assembled hosts, though it is only the noble and dauntless man who defends his honor."

Hassan ibn Thabit al-Ansari answered him, saying:

مِنْهُ وَعَاشَ مُجَدَّعاً لاَ يَسْمَعُ
أَبَكَى لِكَعْبٍ ثُمَّ عُلَّ بِعَبْرَةٍ
قَتْلَى تَسُحُّ لَهَا الْعُيُونُ وَتَدْمَعُ
وَلَقَدْ رَأَيْتُ بِبَطْنِ بَدْرٍ مِنْهُمُ

"From him, and he lived on maimed and unhearing. Shall I weep for Ka'b, and then be given a second draught of tears? And I have seen in the hollow of Badr among them slain men for whom eyes pour and weep."

Then Ka'b said: "By God, I used to tell you, O son of Salamah, that the matter would come to what I said." Silkan said to him: "I have come wanting you to sell us food, and we will give you a pledge." He said: "Will you pledge your sons?" Silkan replied: "You would have us disgraced among the Arabs. I have companions of my own in the same condition as myself, and I have brought them to you, so sell to them and deal well in it, and we will pledge to you in weapons what is sufficient surety." What they intended by this was that their bearing arms should not be thought strange. Ka'b said: "If there is sufficiency in the weapons, then so be it."

Silkan returned to his companions and ordered them to take up their arms, and they came on. Abu Na'ilah, that is Silkan, called out to him, and Ka'b was in his fortress. Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf came down to them, and they spoke with him much as Silkan had spoken, saying: "Muhammad has made enmity between us and the Arabs." He inclined to their talk, and they said: "Will you come out with us and walk to the ravine of al-'Ajuz, and we will talk through the rest of this night of ours?" He said: "If you wish." So they went out walking a while.

Then Abu Na'ilah ran his hand through the side-locks of Ka'b's head and smelled his hand and said: "I have never smelled a perfume sweeter than this." Ibn al-Ashraf was newly wed. He walked on a while, then did the same again, until Ka'b was at ease, then did it once more, and this time seized him by the side-lock of his head and said to his companions: "Strike the enemy of God." So they killed him. The enemy of God had given one great cry, and not a fortress of the fortresses of the Jews was left without a fire being kindled upon it. Their swords had crossed and struck al-Harith ibn Aws ibn Mu'adh, so they carried him and got away safely until they came to the Messenger of God while he was standing in prayer. When he gave the salutation he came out to them, and they informed him of the killing of the enemy of God. The Prophet praised them and thanked them, and after that the Jews were seized with a severe fear.

Ka'b ibn Malik said concerning the killing of Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf:

فَذَلَّتْ بَعْدَ مَصْرَعِهِ النَّضِيْرُ
فَعُودِرَ مِنْهُمُ كَعْبٌ صَرِيْعاً
عَلَى الْكَفَّيْنِ ثُمَّ وَقَدْ عَلَتْهُ
بِأَيْدِيْنَا مُشَهَّرَةً ذُكُورُ
إِلَى كَعْبٍ أَخَا كَعْبٍ يَسِيْرُ
بِأَمْرِ مُحَمَّدٍ إِذْ دَسَّ لَيْلاً
فَمَاكَرَهُ فَأَنْزَلَهُ بِمَكْرٍ
وَمَحْمُودٌ أَخُو ثِقَةٍ جَسُورُ

"And al-Nadir was abased after his fall, for Ka'b was left among them stretched out slain. Upon the two palms, and there had come over him in our hands bright blades of tempered steel, sent by the command of Muhammad when he dispatched by night to Ka'b the brother of Ka'b, travelling to him. So he outwitted him and brought him down by a stratagem, and Mahmud is a trustworthy brother and a bold one."
