# Uhud: The Archers Who Left the Hill

When the losses of the Quraysh at Badr had been counted and their broken companies had returned to Mecca, Abu Sufyan ibn Harb did not cease to stir the Quraysh to war against the Messenger of Allah and to command them to seek their vengeance. He said to them: "O assembly of Quraysh, Muhammad has wronged you and killed your best men, so aid us with this wealth in the war against him," meaning the wealth that had been brought to safety with the caravan on the day of Badr.

They did so and answered his call, and concerning them Allah, exalted is He, revealed:

> ﴿إِنَّ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ يُنفِقُونَ أَمْوَالَهُمْ لِيَصُدُّواْ عَن سَبِيلِ اللّهِ فَسَيُنفِقُونَهَا ثُمَّ تَكُونُ عَلَيْهِمْ حَسْرَةً ثُمَّ يُغْلَبُونَ وَالَّذِينَ كَفَرُواْ إِلَى جَهَنَّمَ يُحْشَرُونَ﴾ [الأنفال: ٣٦]
>
> "Those who disbelieve spend their wealth to turn people away from the path of Allah. They will spend it, then it will become a source of regret for them, then they will be overcome. And those who disbelieve will be gathered to Hell."

So the Quraysh gathered for war against the Messenger of Allah once Abu Sufyan had done this: the people of the caravan with their allied bands, and those who obeyed them from the tribes of Kinanah and the people of Tihamah. They marched out with their full strength, their resolve, their iron, their allied bands, and all who answered them from the tribes of Tihamah, and they took their women out with them, seeking to bind the men to their honour so that they would not flee.

Abu Sufyan, the commander of the people, went out with Hind bint 'Utbah. 'Ikrimah ibn Abi Jahl went out with Umm Hakim bint al-Harith ibn Hisham ibn al-Mughirah. Al-Harith ibn Hisham ibn al-Mughirah went out with Fatimah bint al-Walid ibn al-Mughirah. Scarcely any of the women of Quraysh stayed behind. They advanced until they encamped at 'Aynayn, by a hill in the hollow of the Sabkhah of Qanat, on the lip of the valley, facing Medina.

When the Messenger of Allah and the Muslims heard that they had encamped where they had encamped, he said to the Muslims:

> «إِنِّي قَدْ رَأَيْتُ وَاللهِ خَيْراً، رَأَيْتُ بَقَراً، وَرَأَيْتُ فِي ذُبَابِ سَيْفِي ثَلْماً، وَرَأَيْتُ أَنِّي أَدْخَلْتُ يَدِي فِي دِرْعٍ حَصِيْنَةٍ، فَأَوَّلْتُهَا الْمَدِيْنَةَ. فَأَمَّا الْبَقَرُ فَهْيَ أُنَاسٌ مِنْ أَصْحَابِي يُقْتَلُونَ، وَأَمَّا الثَّلْمُ الَّذِي رَأَيْتُ فِي ذُبَابِ سَيْفِي، فَهْوَ رَجُلٌ مِنْ أَهْلِ بَيْتِي يُقْتَلُ»
>
> "By Allah, I have seen good. I saw cattle, and I saw a notch in the blade of my sword, and I saw that I had put my hand into a strong coat of mail, and I interpreted it as Medina. As for the cattle, they are men of my companions who will be killed. And as for the notch that I saw in the blade of my sword, that is a man of my household who will be killed."

Then he set the matter of the fighting before them:

> «فَإِنْ رَأَيْتُمْ أَنْ تُقِيمُوا بِالْمَدِينَةِ وَتَدَعُوهُمْ حَيْثُ نَزَلُوا، فَإِنْ أَقَامُوا أَقَامُوا بِشَرِّ مُقَامٍ، وَإِنْ هُمْ دَخَلُوا عَلَيْنَا قَاتَلْنَاهُمْ فِيهَا»
>
> "If you see fit to remain in Medina and leave them where they have encamped, then if they stay they stay in an evil position, and if they come in upon us we shall fight them within it."

The opinion of 'Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul agreed with the opinion of the Messenger of Allah in this, that he should not go out to them, and some of the people of Medina agreed with him. But others said: "Rather let us go out to them and fight them, so that their affair does not terrify our women and our children." They refused to accept the word of the Messenger of Allah, so he entered his house, put on his armour, then came out angry and ordered them to march out. When they saw this in him they said: "O Messenger of Allah, we fear that we have angered you by opposing you, so return and do as you see fit." He said:

> «إِنَّ النَّبِيَّ إِذَا لَبِسَ لَأْمَتَهُ، وَأَخَذَ سِلاحَهُ لَمْ يَرْجِعْ حَتَّى يُقَاتِلَ»
>
> "When a prophet has put on his armour and taken up his weapon, he does not turn back until he fights."

So the Messenger of Allah went out with a thousand of his companions. When they were at al-Shawt, between Medina and Uhud, 'Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul broke away from him with a third of the men, saying: «أَطَاعَهُمْ وَعَصَانِي، مَا نَدْرِي عَلَامَ نَقْتُلُ أَنْفُسَنَا هَاهُنَا أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ», "He obeyed them and disobeyed me. We do not know why we should kill ourselves here, O people." He turned back with those of his people who followed him, the people of hypocrisy and doubt.

The Messenger of Allah went on until he came to the stony tract of the Banu Harithah, where a horse flicked its tail and struck the hilt of a sword so that it was drawn from its sheath. He loved a good omen, and he said to the owner of the sword:

> «شِمْ سَيْفَكَ، فَإِنِّي أَرَى السُّيُوفَ سَتُسَلُّ الْيَوْمَ»
>
> "Sheathe your sword, for I see that the swords will be drawn today."

He went on until he encamped in the ravine of Uhud, on the near side of the valley towards the mountain, setting his back and his camp to Uhud, and he said:

> «لا يُقَاتِلَنَّ أَحَدٌ مِنْكُمْ حَتَّى آمُرَهُ بِالْقِتَالِ»
>
> "Let none of you fight until I command him to fight."

The Quraysh had turned their pack animals and their cavalry loose in crops belonging to the Muslims at al-Samghah of Qanat, and a man of the Ansar said: «أَتُرْعَى زُرُوعُ بَنِي قَيْلَةَ وَلَمَّا نُضَارِبْ؟», "Are the crops of the Banu Qaylah to be grazed while we have not yet fought?"

The Messenger of Allah drew up seven hundred men for battle, and set over the archers 'Abdullah ibn Jubayr, brother of the Banu 'Amr ibn 'Awf. The archers were fifty men, and he said to them:

> «انْضَحِ الْخَيْلَ عَنَّا بِالنَّبْلِ، لاَ يَأْتُونَا مِنْ خَلْفِنَا، إِنْ كَانَتْ عَلَيْنَا، أَوْ كَانَتْ لَنَا، فَاثْبُتْ مَكَانَكَ لاَ نُؤْتَيَنَّ مِنْ قِبَلِكَ، وَاثْبُتُوا لا تُؤْتَى مِنْ مَكَانِكُمْ»
>
> "Drive the cavalry off from us with arrows, so that they do not come at us from behind, whether the day goes against us or for us. Hold your place, so that we are not attacked from your side. Hold fast, so that we are not attacked from your position."

The Messenger of Allah wore two coats of mail, one over the other. The Quraysh drew up in array, three thousand men, with two hundred horse.

Then the Messenger of Allah took his sword and brandished it and said:

> «مَنْ يَأْخُذُ هَذَا السَّيْفَ بِحَقِّهِ؟»
>
> "Who will take this sword with its right?"

Al-Zubayr said: "I will, O Messenger of Allah." He turned away from him. Then Abu Dujanah al-Ansari, one of the champions of the Ansar, said: "And what is its right, O Messenger of Allah?" He said:

> «لا تَقِفْ بِهِ فِي الْكُيُولِ، وَأَنْ تَضْرِبَ بِهِ الْعَدُوَّ حَتَّى يَنْحَنِيَ»
>
> "That you do not stand with it in the rear ranks, and that you strike the enemy with it until it bends."

He said: "I will take it, O Messenger of Allah, with its right." So Abu Dujanah al-Ansari, Simak ibn Kharashah, brother of the Banu Sa'idah, took it. Then he brought out a red band and bound it about his head, and the Ansar said: "Abu Dujanah has bound on the band of death." Whenever he bound it on, that was his practice. Then he went out strutting between the two lines, saying:

> أَنَا الَّذِي عَاهَدَنِي خَلِيْلِي
> وَنَحْنُ بِالسَّفْحِ لَدَى النَّخِيْلِ
> أَلَّا أَقُومَ الدَّهْرَ فِي الْكَيُّولِ
> أَضْرِبْ بِسَيْفِ اللهِ والرَّسُولِ
>
> "I am the one whose close friend took a pledge from me,
> while we were at the mountain's foot beside the palms,
> that I would never stand in the rear ranks,
> but strike with the sword of Allah and of the Messenger."

When the Messenger of Allah saw Abu Dujanah al-Ansari strutting, he said:

> «إِنَّهَا لَمِشْيَةٌ يُبْغِضُهَا اللهُ إِلاَّ فِي مِثْلِ هَذِهِ الْمَوَاطِنِ»
>
> "It is a gait that Allah hates, except in places such as this."

Abu Sufyan said to the standard-bearers of the Banu 'Abd al-Dar: "You abandoned the standard on the day of Badr, and there came upon us what you have seen. Either you suffice us in the matter of our standard, or leave it between us and it, and we shall suffice you in it." They grew angry at him and threatened him, and said: "We shall hand our standard over to you? Tomorrow, when we meet them, you will learn what we do." By this Abu Sufyan intended only to rouse them.

Hind bint 'Utbah and the women with her beat tambourines and incited the polytheists, and Hind was saying:

> نَحْنُ بَنَاتُ طَارِقْ
> نَمْشِي عَلَى النَّمَارِقْ
> إِنْ تُقْبِلُوا نُعَانِقْ
> وَتَفْرِشُ النَّمَارِقْ
> أَوْ تُدْبِرُوا نُفَارِقْ
> فِرَاقَ غَيْرِ وَامِقْ
> عَرُوسُ الْمَوْلَى طَالِقْ
> وَالْعَارُ مِنْهُ لاحِقْ
>
> "We are the daughters of Tariq,
> we walk upon soft cushions.
> If you advance, we embrace,
> and the cushions are spread out;
> but if you turn back, we part,
> the parting of one who loves no more,
> the bride of the master divorced,
> and the shame of it clinging to him."

She also said:

> صَبْراً بَنِي عَبْدِ الدَّارْ
> وَيْهاً حُمَاةَ الْأَدْبَارْ
> ضَرْباً بِكُلِّ بَتَّارْ
>
> "Steadfastness, O Banu 'Abd al-Dar!
> On, you guardians of the rear!
> Strike with every cleaving blade!"

The watchword of the companions of the Messenger of Allah on the day of Uhud was: «يَا مَنْصُورُ؛ أَمِتْ أَمِتْ», "O Mansur, kill, kill," that is, no quarter and no softness.

The people fought until the war grew hot, and Abu Dujanah fought until he had driven deep into the enemy.

Al-Zubayr ibn al-'Awwam said: "I found something in myself when I asked the Messenger of Allah for the sword and he withheld it from me and gave it to Abu Dujanah, and I said: I am the son of Safiyyah his aunt, and of Quraysh. By Allah, I shall watch what Abu Dujanah does. So I followed him. He met no one but he killed him. Among the polytheists was a man who left no wounded Muslim without finishing him off, and each of the two kept drawing nearer to the other, and I asked Allah to bring them together. They met and exchanged two blows. The polytheist struck Abu Dujanah, and he warded it off with his shield, and the sword bit into it; then Abu Dujanah struck him and killed him. Then I saw him bring the sword down upon the parting of the head of Hind bint 'Utbah, and she shrieked, and Abu Dujanah turned aside from her." He said: "I honoured the sword of the Messenger of Allah too much to strike a woman with it."

Hamzah ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib fought until he had killed Arta'ah ibn 'Abd Shurahbil ibn Hashim ibn 'Abd Manaf ibn 'Abd al-Dar, one of the company who carried the standard. Then Siba' ibn 'Abd al-'Uzza al-Ghubshani, who was called Abu Niyar, passed by him, and Hamzah said to him: «هَلُمَّ إِلَيَّ يَا ابْنَ مُقَطِّعَةِ الْبُظُورِ», "Come to me, O son of the woman who cuts," for his mother used to circumcise slave girls. When the two met, Hamzah (ع) struck him and killed him.

The fighting locked together, and Ali (ع) and Hamzah dealt the polytheists a severe trial. Talhah ibn Abi Talhah, the standard-bearer of the polytheists, called out: "O companions of Muhammad, you claim that whoever of us is killed is in the Fire, and whoever of you is killed is in the Garden. Which of you will come out to me, to hasten me to the Fire and let me hasten him to the Garden?"

Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) came out to him and said: "By Allah, I shall not part from you until I hasten you to the Fire, if Allah wills."

Each charged upon the other, both of them in full armour, and the mail slipped back from Talhah's leg, so Ali (ع) struck him with the sword and severed his leg. He stood over his head intending to kill him, and Talhah adjured him by Allah and by kinship. Ali (ع) said: "When he adjured me by Allah and by kinship, I was ashamed to kill him, so I left him, knowing that he would not live." Talhah died of that blow.

After him Abu Sa'id ibn Abi Talhah took the standard, and Sa'd ibn Abi Waqqas (ع) killed him. Then 'Uthman ibn Abi Talhah took the standard, and Hamzah (ع) killed him. Then Musafi' ibn Talhah took it, and 'Asim ibn Thabit ibn Abi al-Aqlah killed him.

The Muslims were true in the fighting and pressed the polytheists hard with killing and wounding, and the polytheists were routed. When the archers saw the rout, they abandoned what the Messenger of Allah had commanded them, to keep to their positions, and followed the enemy in desire for the spoils, saying: "The spoils escaped us on the day of Badr." When the archers had uncovered the Messenger of Allah, Abu Sufyan and Khalid ibn al-Walid and the polytheists wheeled back upon them.

Wahshi, the slave of Jubayr ibn Mut'im, watched Hamzah as he raged like a great stallion, no polytheist coming near him without being killed. Jubayr had said to Wahshi: "If you kill Hamzah, the uncle of Muhammad, for my uncle Tu'aymah ibn 'Adi, you are free." And Hind had promised him herself if he killed Hamzah. So Wahshi lay in wait for Hamzah (ع) behind a tree, until Siba' ibn 'Abd al-'Uzza came forward and Hamzah (ع) leapt upon him and killed him. Then Wahshi intercepted him and hurled his javelin, and it fell in the lower part of Hamzah's body. Hamzah (ع) moved towards him, but he was overcome, and he fell.

The polytheists killed Mus'ab ibn 'Umayr, the banner of the Ansar in his hand, before the Messenger of Allah.

Hanzalah ibn Abi 'Amir met Abu Sufyan, and when Hanzalah had the advantage over him with the sword and was about to strike his skull, Shaddad ibn al-Aswad, who was Ibn Shu'ub, sprang upon him and killed him before he could reach Abu Sufyan. He was named "al-Ghasil," the washed one, because of the word of the Messenger of Allah:

> «رَأَيْتُ الْمَلائِكَةَ تُغَسِّلُ حَنْظَلَةَ بْنَ أَبِي عَامِرٍ»
>
> "I saw the angels washing Hanzalah ibn Abi 'Amir."

He had gone out to the fighting in a state of ritual impurity, without having washed.

When Hanzalah was killed, Abu Sufyan cried: «أَعْلُ هُبَلُ!», "Rise high, Hubal!" and called: "Hanzalah for Hanzalah," meaning his own son, who had been killed at Badr by Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع). The Messenger of Allah said:

> «اللهُ أَعْلَى وَأَجَلُّ وَلاَ سَوَاءٌ؛ قَتْلَانَا فِي الْجَنَّةِ، وَقَتْلَاكُمْ فِي النَّارِ»
>
> "Allah is higher and mightier, and they are not equal: our slain are in the Garden, and your slain are in the Fire."

The standard of the polytheists had fallen when those of its people whom we have named were killed. 'Amrah bint 'Alqamah al-Harithiyyah took it up and raised it for the Quraysh. The standard was then with Suwab, a slave of the Quraysh, who fought until he was killed, saying: «اللَّهُمَّ هَلْ أَعْزَرْتُ؟», that is, "O Allah, have I done what excuses me?"

Concerning that, Hassan ibn Thabit al-Ansari said:

> لِوَاءٌ حِيْنَ رُدَّ إِلَى صُؤَابٍ
> فَخَرْتُمْ بِاللِّوَاءِ وَشَرُّ فَخْرٍ
> وَأَلْأَمِ مَنْ يَطَا عَفَرَ التُّرَابِ
> جَعَلْتُمْ فَخْرَكُمْ فِيْهِ لِعَبْدٍ
> وَذَلِكَ لَيْسَ مِنْ أَمْرِ الصَّوَابِ
> ظَنَنْتُمْ وَالسَّفِيْهُ لَهُ ظُنُونٌ
> بِمَكَّةَ بَيْعُكُمْ حُمْرَ الْعِيَابِ
> بِأَنَّ جِلاَدَنَا يَوْمَ الْتَقَيْنَا
> وَمَا إِنْ تُعْصَبَانِ عَلَى خِضَابِ
> أَقَرَّ الْعَيْنَ أَنْ عُصِبَتْ يَدَاهُ
>
> "A standard, when it was handed back to Suwab.
> You boasted of the standard, and an evil boast it was,
> and of the meanest of those who tread the dust of the earth.
> You set your pride in it upon a slave,
> and that is no part of what is right.
> You supposed, and the fool has his suppositions,
> that our sword-play on the day we met
> was a selling in Mecca of red packs of goods.
> His hands were bound, and that was a comfort to the eye,
> and they are not bound over any dye."

Hassan ibn Thabit also said concerning 'Amrah bint 'Alqamah al-Harithiyyah when she raised the standard:

> إِذَا عَضَلٌ سِيْقَتْ إِلَيْنَا كَأَنَّهَا حِدَايَةُ شَرْكٍ مُعْلَمَاتُ الْحَوَاجِبِ
> وَحُزْنَاهُمُ بِالضَّرْبِ مِنْ كُلِّ جَانِبِ
> أَقَمْنَا لَهُمْ طَعْناً وَضَرْباً مُنَكَّلاً
> يُبَاعُونَ فِي الأَسْوَاقِ بَيْعَ الْحَلائِبِ
> فَلَوْلاَ لِوَاءُ الْحَارِثِيَّةِ أَصْبَحُوا
>
> "When 'Adal were driven to us as though they were snared kites, their brows marked out,
> we dealt them stabbing and a punishing blow,
> and drove them with the sword from every side.
> Were it not for the standard of the Harithiyyah, they would have found themselves
> sold in the markets like herded milk-camels."

When the archers left their positions and went against the word of the Messenger of Allah, the polytheists charged, the Muslims were routed, and a voice cried out, and the crier was Satan, from whom we seek refuge in Allah: «أَلا إِنَّ مُحَمَّداً قَدْ قُتِلَ», "Muhammad has been killed."

'Amr, fleeing, met Anas ibn al-Nadr and told him that the Messenger of Allah had been killed. Anas said: "What will you do with life after him? Go back and die upon that which the Messenger of Allah died upon." Then he turned to face the enemy and fought until he was killed, may the mercy of Allah be upon him.

The Messenger of Allah was left alone. The polytheists killed those who stood before him, and they wounded him and broke his lower right tooth, and cut his lip, and shattered the helmet upon his head, and struck him some sixty blows and more. He had that day worn two coats of mail, one over the other.

Ali (ع) came forward when the Messenger of Allah had fallen into a pit, and he took his hand and raised him up. The Messenger of Allah stood upon a rock, and Ali (ع) remained before him alone, the people having drawn away from him. He said: «امْضِ يَا عَلِيُّ», "Go forth, O Ali." He said: "Where shall I go, O Messenger of Allah? Shall I return a disbeliever after I have submitted?"

Squadrons of the polytheists kept coming upon the two of them, and the Messenger of Allah would charge one of them and say: «احْمِلْ يَا عَلِيُّ عَلَى هَؤُلاءِ الآخَرِينَ», "Charge, O Ali, upon these others." So the two of them would drive back whoever came against them and turn them away, after they had dealt them a hard trial. There was from the two of them (عليهم السلام) on that day what had never been from anyone before them, until Allah, mighty and majestic, drove the polytheists back and routed them through the two of them.
