# Betrayal at al-Raji and Bir Ma'unah

After Uhud, a company from Adal and al-Qarah, who trace their descent to al-Hunn ibn Khuzaymah ibn Mudrikah, came to the Messenger of Allah in Medina and said:

> يا رسول الله؛ ابعث معنا من أصحابك من يُفقّهنا في الدِّين، ويعلّمنا القرآن، فإنَّ فينا إسلاماً.

"O Messenger of Allah, send with us some of your companions who will instruct us in the religion and teach us the Quran, for there is Islam among us."

So he sent six of his companions with them: Marthad ibn Abi Marthad al-Ghanawi, ally of Hamza ibn Abd al-Muttalib; Khalid ibn al-Bukayr al-Laythi, ally of Banu Adi ibn Ka'b; Asim ibn Thabit ibn Abi al-Aqlah, of Banu Amr ibn Awf ibn Malik ibn al-Aws; Zayd ibn al-Dathinnah ibn Mu'awiya, of Banu Bayadah ibn Jusham ibn al-Khazraj; Khubayb ibn Adi, of Banu Jahjaba ibn Kulfa; and Abdullah ibn Tariq, ally of Banu Zafar ibn al-Khazraj ibn Amr ibn Malik ibn al-Aws.

The Messenger of Allah placed Marthad ibn Abi Marthad al-Ghanawi in command over them. They set out with the delegation, and when they reached al-Raji' in the region of the Hijaz, their hosts betrayed them and raised the cry against them among Hudhayl. Nothing warned the party, who were still at their halting place among their saddles, until men stood over them with swords in their hands. The companions seized their own swords to fight, and the attackers called out:

> إنا والله ما نُريد قتلكم، ولكنَّا نُريد أن نُصيب بكم شيئاً من أهل مكّة، ولكم عهد الله وميثاقه أن لا نقتلكم.

"By Allah, we do not desire to kill you. We only desire to gain something by you from the people of Mecca, and you have the covenant of Allah and His pledge that we will not kill you."

Marthad ibn Abi Marthad, Khalid ibn al-Bukayr, and Asim ibn Thabit answered:

> والله لا نقبل من عهد المشرك.

"By Allah, we will not accept the covenant of an idolater."

Asim ibn Thabit then said:

> مَا عِلَّتِي، وَأَنَا جَلْدٌ نَابِلُ
> وَالْقَوْسُ فِيْهَا وَتَرٌ عُنَابِلُ
> أَقِلُّ عَنْ صَفْحَتِهَا الْمَعَابِلُ
> الْمَوْتُ حَقٌّ، وَالْحَيَاةُ بَاطِلُ
> وَكُلُّ مَا حَمَّ الإِلَهُ نَازِلُ
> بِالْمَرْءِ وَالْمَرْءُ إِلَيْهِ آيِلُ
> إِنْ لَمْ أُقَاتِلْكُمْ فَأُمِّي هَابِلُ

What ails me, when I am hardy and an archer,
and my bow carries a thick, twisted string,
turning the broad arrowheads aside from its face?
Death is a certainty and life is a passing thing,
and all that Allah has decreed comes down
upon a man, and to it the man returns.
If I do not fight you, may my mother be bereaved.

He also said:

> أَبُو سُلَيْمَانَ وَرِيْشُ الْمُقْعَدِ
> وَضَالَةٌ مِثْلُ الْجَحِيْمِ الْمُوقَدِ
> إِذَا النَّوَاجِي افْتُرِشَتْ لَمْ أُرْعِدِ
> وَمِحْنَأٌ مِنْ جِلْدِ ثَوْرٍ أَجْرَدِ
> وَمُؤْمِنٌ بِمَا عَلَى مُحَمَّدٍ

I am Abu Sulayman, and mine are the feathers of the eagle's plume,
and a bow of sidr wood like a kindled blaze.
When the sword blades are spread out I do not tremble,
and I have a tanned shield from the hide of a smooth-coated bull,
and I am a believer in what was sent down upon Muhammad.

Asim went by the name Abu Sulayman. He fought the enemy until he was killed, and his two companions were killed with him, may Allah have mercy upon them.

When Asim was slain, Hudhayl wished to take his head to sell it to Sulafa bint Sa'd ibn Shuhayd, who had vowed, when he killed her two sons, that if she gained possession of his head she would drink wine in his skull. But a swarm of hornets protected him and kept them from him, for Asim had given Allah a covenant that no idolater should ever touch him, and that he should never touch an idolater. They said: "The hornets have guarded him. When night comes we will take him." Then Allah sent a torrent that filled the valley, and it bore Asim away.

As for Zayd ibn al-Dathinnah, Khubayb ibn Adi, and Abdullah ibn Tariq, they softened and inclined and desired life, so they gave their hands and were taken captive. Their captors set out with them toward Mecca to sell them there. At al-Zahran, Abdullah ibn Tariq wrenched his hand free from the bond and seized his sword. The people drew back from him and pelted him with stones until they killed him. His grave, may Allah have mercy on him, is at al-Zahran.

They brought Khubayb ibn Adi and Zayd ibn al-Dathinnah to Mecca and sold them to Quraysh, and Quraysh killed them after crucifying them, may Allah have mercy upon them both.

Khubayb said, when they were about to kill him:

> لَقَدْ جَمَّعَ الأَحْزَابُ حَوْلِي وَأَلَّبُوا
> قَبَائِلَهُمْ وَاسْتَجْمَعُوا كُلَّ مَجْمَعِ
> وَكُلُّهُمْ مُبْدِي الْعَدَاوَةِ جَاهِدٌ
> عَلَيَّ لأَنِّي فِي وِثَاقٍ بِمَضْيَعِ
> وَقَدْ جَمَّعُوا أَبْنَاءَهُمْ وَنِسَاءَهُمْ
> وَقُرِّبْتُ مِنْ جِذْعٍ طَوِيْلٍ مُمَنَّعِ
> إِلَى اللهِ أَشْكُو غُرْبَتِي ثُمَّ كُرْبَتِي
> وَمَا أَرْصَدَ الأَحْزَابُ لِي عِنْدَ مَصْرَعِي
> فَذَا الْعَرْشِ، صَبِّرْنِي عَلَى مَا يُرَادُ بِي
> فَقَدْ بَضَّعُوا لَحْمِي وَقَدْ يَاسَ مَطْمَعِي
> وَذَلِكَ فِي ذَاتِ الإِلَهِ وَإِنْ يَشَأْ
> يُبَارِكْ عَلَى أَوْصَالِ شِلْوٍ مُمَزَّعِ
> وَقَدْ خَيَّرُونِي الْكُفْرَ وَالْمَوْتُ دُونَهُ
> وَقَدْ هَمَلَتْ عَيْنَايَ مِنْ غَيْرِ مَجْزَعِ
> وَمَا بِي حِذَارُ الْمَوْتِ، إِنِّي لَمَيِّتٌ
> وَلَكِنْ حِذَارِي جَحْمُ نَارٍ مُلَفَّعِ
> فَوَاللهِ مَا أَرْجُو إِذَا مِتُّ مُسْلِماً
> عَلَى أَيِّ جَنْبٍ كَانَ فِي اللهِ مَصْرَعِي
> فَلَسْتُ بِمُبْدٍ لِلْعَدُوِّ تَخَشُّعاً
> وَلاَ جَزَعاً إِنِّي إِلَى اللهِ مَرْجِعِي

The factions have gathered around me and stirred up
their tribes, and assembled every assembly,
and every one of them shows enmity and strains
against me, because I am bound in a place of ruin.
They have brought together their sons and their women,
and I have been drawn near to a tall, unscalable trunk.
To Allah I complain of my exile, then of my anguish,
and of what the factions have prepared for me at my place of death.
O Lord of the Throne, give me patience for what is intended for me,
for they have cut my flesh to pieces and my hope is despaired of.
This is in the cause of Allah, and if He wills
He will bless the joints of a body torn apart.
They offered me the choice of unbelief, and death is better than it,
and my eyes have overflowed, yet without panic.
It is no dread of death that is in me, for I am to die,
but my dread is of a blazing, enveloping fire.
By Allah, if I die a Muslim I have no care
on which side in Allah's cause my fall may come.
I will not show the enemy submission,
nor dismay, for to Allah is my return.

Hassan ibn Thabit said, weeping for Khubayb and his companions:

> صَلَّى الْإِلَهُ عَلَى الَّذِيْنَ تَتَابَعُوا
> يَوْمَ الرَّجِيْعِ فَأُكْرِمُوا وَأُثِيْبُوا
> رَأْسُ السَّرِيَّةِ مَرْثَدٌ وَأَمِيْرُهُمْ
> ابْنُ الْبُكَيْرِ أَمَامَهُمْ وَخُبَيْبُ
> وَابْنٌ لِطَارِقٍ وَابْنُ دَثِنَةَ مِنْهُمُ
> وَافَاهُ ثَمَّ حِمَامُهُ الْمَكْتُوبُ
> وَالْعَاصِمُ الْمَقْتُولُ عِنْدَ رَجِيْعِهِمْ
> كَسَبَ الْمَعَالِي إِنَّهُ لَكَسُوبُ
> مَنَعَ الْمَقَاذِفَ أَنْ يَنَالُوا ظَهْرَهُ
> حَتَّى يُجَالِدَ إِنَّهُ لَنَجِيْبُ

May Allah bless those who followed one another
on the Day of al-Raji', so they were honored and rewarded.
The head of the company was Marthad, their commander,
with Ibn al-Bukayr before them, and Khubayb;
and the son of Tariq and the son of Dathinnah among them,
each of whom met there the death appointed for him.
And Asim, slain at their al-Raji',
gained the heights, and truly he was a gainer.
He kept the hurled stones from reaching his back
so that he might fight on, and truly he was noble.

Hassan ibn Thabit also said, satirizing Hudhayl:

> هُمُ قَتَلُوا يَوْمَ الرَّجِيْعِ ابْنَ حُرَّةٍ
> أَخَا ثِقَةٍ فِي وُدِّهِ وَصَفَاءِ
> لَحَى اللَّهُ لِحْيَانَا فَلَيْسَتْ دِمَاؤُهُمْ
> لَنَا مِنْ قَتِيلِ غَدْرَةٍ بِوَفَاءِ
> فَلَوْ قُتِلُوا يَوْمَ الرَّجِيْعِ بِأَسْرِهِمْ
> بِذِي الدَّبْرِ مَا كَانُوا لَهُ بِكَفَاءِ
> قَتِيلٌ حَمَتْهُ الدَّبْرُ حَوْلَ بُيُوتِهِمْ
> لَدَى أَهْلِ كُفْرٍ ظَاهِرٍ وَجَفَاءِ
> فَقَدْ قَتَلَتْ لِحْيَانُ أَكْرَمَ مِنْهُمُ
> وَبَاعُوا خُبَيْباً بَعْدَهُ بِلَفَاءِ
> فَأُفٍّ لِلِحْيَانَ عَلَى كُلِّ حَالَةٍ
> عَلَى ذِكْرِهِمْ فِي الذِّكْرِ كُلُّ عَفَاءِ
> قَبِيْلَةٌ بِالغَدْرِ وَاللُّؤْمِ تَعْتَزِي
> فَلَمْ تُمْسِ تُخْفِي لُؤْمَهَا بِخَفَاءِ
> وَإِنْ قُتِلُوا لَمْ تُوفِ مِنْهُمْ دِمَاؤُهُمْ
> بَلَى إِنَّ قَتْلَ الْقَاتِلِيْنَ شِفَائِي
> فَإِنْ لا أَمُتْ أَذْعَرْ هُذَيْلاً بِغَارَةٍ
> كَغَادِي الْجَهَامِ الْمُعْتَدِي بِفَاءِ
> بِأَمْرِ رَسُولِ اللهِ وَالأَمْرُ أَمْرُهُ
> يَبِيْتُ لِلِحْيَانَ الْخَنَا بِفِنَاءِ
> فَيُصْبِحُ قَوْمٌ بِالرَّجِيْعِ كَأَنَّهُمْ
> جِدَاءُ شِتَاءٍ بِتْنَ غَيْرَ دِفَاءِ

They killed on the Day of al-Raji' the son of a noble woman,
a brother of trust in his affection and purity.
May Allah disfigure Lihyan, for their blood
is no fair recompense to us for one slain by treachery.
Were they killed, every last one of them, on the Day of al-Raji'
at the place of the hornets, they would be no equal for him:
a slain man whom the hornets guarded around their dwellings,
among a people of open unbelief and harshness.
Lihyan has killed one nobler than themselves,
and after him they sold Khubayb for a worthless price.
So shame upon Lihyan in every state,
and upon their memory, whenever they are mentioned, be effacement.
A tribe that claims kinship with treachery and baseness,
and never passes an evening hiding its baseness from view.
Even if they are killed, their blood does not pay the debt of them,
yet the killing of the killers would be my healing.
If I do not die, I will terrify Hudhayl with a raid
like a cloud that comes at dawn and passes over.
By the command of the Messenger of Allah, and the command is his,
foulness shall spend the night in Lihyan's courtyard,
and a people at al-Raji' shall rise in the morning
like winter kids that have passed the night without warmth.

The Messenger of Allah remained in Medina through the remainder of Shawwal, Dhu al-Qa'dah, and Dhu al-Hijjah, and the idolaters presided over that Hajj, and through al-Muharram. Then, in Safar, four months after Uhud, he sent out the companions of Bi'r Ma'unah.

The cause of it was that Abu Bara' Amir ibn Malik ibn Ja'far, called Mula'ib al-Asinnah, came to the Messenger of Allah in Medina. The Messenger of Allah presented Islam to him and called him to it. He did not accept Islam, nor did he place himself far from it, and he said:

> يا محمَّد لو بعثتَ رِجالاً من أصحابك إلى أهل نَجْد، فَدَعَوْهُم إلى الله، رجوتُ أن يستجيبوا لك.

"O Muhammad, if you were to send men from among your companions to the people of Najd to call them to Allah, I would hope that they would answer you."

The Messenger of Allah said:

> إِنِّي أخشى عليهم أهل نَجْد.

"I fear for them the people of Najd."

Abu Bara' said:

> أنا لهم جار، فابْعَثْهُمْ فَلْيَدْعُوا النَّاسَ إلى أمرك.

"I am their protector. Send them, and let them call the people to your affair."

So the Messenger of Allah sent al-Mundhir ibn Amr, of Banu Sa'idah, the one called al-Mu'niq, at the head of forty men, and in al-Bukhari the number is seventy men, from among the best of the Muslims of his companions. They travelled until they encamped at Bi'r Ma'unah, which lies between the land of Banu Amir and the lava tract of Banu Sulaym, both territories being near to it, though it is nearer to the lava tract of Banu Sulaym.

When they had encamped there they sent one of their number, a man named Haram ibn Milhan, with the letter of the Messenger of Allah to the enemy of Allah, Amir ibn al-Tufayl ibn Malik ibn Ja'far ibn Kilab. When Haram came to him, Amir did not so much as look into the letter before he fell upon the Muslim man and killed him. Then he called Banu Amir to rise against the party, but they refused to answer what he called them to, saying:

> لن نُخْفِر أبا بَراء.

"We will not violate the protection of Abu Bara'."

So he called upon tribes of Banu Sulaym, of Usayya, Ri'l, and Dhakwan, and they answered him. They went out and fell upon the party, surrounding them in their encampment. When the companions saw them they took up their weapons and fought them until they were martyred to the last man, may Allah have mercy upon them, except Ka'b ibn Zayd, of Banu Dinar ibn al-Najjar. They left him with a spark of life still in him, and he remained among the slain until the enemy withdrew. He lived on until he was killed as a martyr on the Day of al-Khandaq.

Amr ibn Umayya al-Damri and a man of the Ansar were out with the party's grazing camels, and nothing told them of the fate of their companions except the birds wheeling above them. They came forward to look, and there were the men slain in the places where they had fallen, with the horses of the enemy standing over them. The Ansari advanced and fought until he was killed, after he had said:

> لا أرغب عن ما وقع فيه أصحابي.

"I will not turn away from that into which my companions have fallen."

They took Amr ibn Umayya prisoner, and when they learned that he was of Mudar, Amir ibn al-Tufayl cut off his forelock and set him free, freeing him on account of a slave his mother, he claimed, had been bound to emancipate.

Amr ibn Umayya set out, and while he was on his road returning to the Messenger of Allah two men of Banu Amir came along. He asked them about their lineage and they told him. They carried a pact of protection from the Messenger of Allah, of which Amr knew nothing. He waited until they slept, then fell upon them and killed them both.

When Amr came to the Messenger of Allah and told him what had happened, the Messenger of Allah said to him:

> لقد قتلت قَتِيْلَيْنِ لأَدِيَنَّهُمَا.

"You have killed two men whose blood money I must surely pay."

Then he said:

> هذا عمل أبي بَراء، لقد كنتُ لهذا كارِهاً.

"This is the work of Abu Bara'. I was indeed unwilling for this."

It weighed heavily upon Abu Bara' that Amir had violated the protection he had granted, and that this had befallen the companions of the Messenger of Allah.

Hassan ibn Thabit said, inciting the sons of Abu Bara' against Amir ibn al-Tufayl:

> بَنِي أُمِّ الْبَنِيْنِ أَلَمْ يَرُعْكُمْ
> وَأَنْتُمْ مِنْ ذَوَائِبِ أَهْلِ نَجْدِ
> تَهَكُّمُ عَامِرٍ بِأَبِي بَرَاءِ
> لِيُخْفِرَهُ، وَمَا خَطَأٌ كَعَمْدِ
> أَلاَ أَبْلِغْ رَبِيْعَةَ ذَا الْمَسَاعِي
> فَمَا أَحْدَثْتَ فِي الْحَدَثَانِ بَعْدِي
> أَبُوكَ أَبُو الْحُرُوبِ أَبُو بَرَاءٍ
> وَخَالُكَ مَاجِدٌ حَكَمُ بْنُ سَعْدِ

O Banu Umm al-Banin, has it not alarmed you,
you who are of the foremost of the people of Najd,
that Amir made mockery of Abu Bara'
in order to violate his protection? And error is not like intent.
Convey to Rabi'a, the man of high endeavours:
what have you brought about in these events after me?
Your father is the father of wars, Abu Bara',
and your maternal uncle is the glorious Hakam ibn Sa'd.

And Hassan ibn Thabit said, weeping for the slain of Bi'r Ma'unah, may Allah have mercy upon them:

> عَلَى قَتْلَى مَعُونَةَ فَاسْتَهِلِّي
> بِدَمْعِ الْعَيْنِ سَحّاً غَيْرَ نَزْرِ
> عَلَى خَيْلِ الرَّسُولِ غَدَاةَ لاقَوْا
> مَنَايَاهُمْ وَلاَقَتْهُمْ بِقَدْرِ
> أَصَابَهُمُ الفَنَاءُ بِعَقْدِ قَوْمٍ
> تُخُوِّنَ عَقْدُ حَبْلِهِمْ بِغَدْرِ
> فَيَا لَهْفِي لِمُنْذِرٍ إِذْ تَوَلَّى
> وَأَعْنَقَ فِي مَنِيَّتِهِ بِصَبْرِ
> وَكَائِنْ قَدْ أُصِيْبَ غَدَاةَ ذَاكُمْ
> مِنَ أَبْيَضَ مَاجِدٍ مِنْ سِرِّ عَمْرِو

Weep for the slain of Ma'unah, and pour out
the tears of the eye in a flood, not in a trickle,
for the horsemen of the Messenger on the morning they met
their appointed deaths, and their deaths met them by decree.
Destruction came upon them through the pact of a people
whose cord of covenant was betrayed by treachery.
Alas for al-Mundhir, when he turned to face them
and pressed on toward his death with patience.
And how many were struck down on that morning,
men of pure and glorious stock, of the noblest line of Amr.
