# Expelling Banu al-Nadir

Then, in the fourth year of the Hijrah, came the expulsion of Banu al-Nadir.

The cause was this. The Messenger of Allah went out to them seeking their help with the blood money owed for the two men slain from Banu 'Amir, whom 'Amr ibn Umayyah al-Damri had killed, since the Messenger of Allah had extended protection to those two men. Between Banu al-Nadir and Banu 'Amir there stood a pact and a sworn alliance. When the Messenger of Allah came to them and asked their assistance, they said:

> «نعم، يا أبا القاسم؛ نُعينك على ما أردت فيما استعنت بنا عليه»

"Yes, O Abu al-Qasim; we will help you with what you have asked of us."

Then they drew apart with one another and said:

> «إِنَّكم لن تجدوا الرَّجُلَ على مثل حاله هذه... فَمَنْ رَجُلٌ يعلو هذا البيت، فيلقي عليه صَخْرَةً، فيريحنا منه؟»

"You will never find the man in a state such as this again. Who will climb to the roof of this house, drop a rock upon him, and rid us of him?"

The Messenger of Allah was seated beside a wall of one of their houses. With him were the Commander of the Faithful (ع) and a small company of his companions.

A man from among the Jews came forward for the task, called 'Amr ibn Jahash ibn Ka'b, and he said to the Jews:

> «أنا أفتك به»

"I will strike him down."

He climbed up to cast a rock upon the Messenger of Allah from the top of the wall in whose shade the Prophet was sitting. But word came to the Messenger of Allah from heaven concerning what the people intended. He rose and went out, returning to Medina, and his companions followed him. He then informed them of the treachery the Jews had resolved upon against him.

The Messenger of Allah ordered preparation for war against them and the march out, and this was in the month of Rabi' al-Awwal. He besieged them for six nights. They had fortified themselves against him in their strongholds, so the Messenger of Allah ordered that their palm trees be cut down and burned.

'Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul and a group of the hypocrites had sent word to them: to stand firm and to hold out. And they promised them:

> «إنَّا لن نُسْلِمَكُمْ، إن قوتلتم قاتلنا معكم، وإن أُخْرِجْتُمْ خرجنا معكم»

"We will not abandon you. If you are fought, we will fight alongside you; and if you are driven out, we will go out with you."

Concerning the hypocrites, verses were revealed from «سورة الحشر», Surah al-Hashr.

Allah cast terror into the hearts of the hypocrites, and they shrank back from what they had promised. So Banu al-Nadir asked the Messenger of Allah to send them into exile and to withhold his hand from their blood. The Prophet granted them safe conduct, and that they should have whatever their camels could carry, except for weapons. They loaded up such of their wealth as they could carry well and departed for Khaybar, while some of them went out to al-Sham. They took their women and children with them, and they went out with tambourines and pipes, and singing girls playing behind them, in a display the like of which had not been seen from any people of their time.

They left their properties to the Messenger of Allah, and these became his alone, to place where he wished. He divided them among the first Muhajirun, to the exclusion of the Ansar, except that Sahl ibn Hunayf and Abu Dujanah, Simak ibn Kharashah, complained to him of poverty, and he gave to them both. Only two men of Banu al-Nadir accepted Islam, and the Prophet left their property to them.

What was said in poetry concerning Banu al-Nadir.

The Commander of the Faithful, 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع), spoke verses recalling the expulsion of Banu al-Nadir and the killing of Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf, the account of whose killing has already been given. In the war against Banu al-Nadir 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) held the renowned station and the merit that is remembered and counted. His words (ع) are:

> عَرَفْتُ وَمَنْ يَعْتَدِلْ يَعْرِفٍ
> عَنِ الْكَلِمِ الْمُحْكَمِ الآي مِنْ
> وَأَيْقَنْتُ حَقّاً وَلَمْ أَصْدِفٍ
> لَدَى اللهِ ذِيِ الرَّأْفَةِ الْأَرْأَفِ
> رَسَائِلُ تُدْرَسُ فِي الْمُؤْمِيْنَ
> بِهِنَّ اصْطَفَى أَحْمَدَ الْمُصْطَفِي
> عَزِيْزَ الْمَقَامَةِ وَالْمَوْقِفِ
> فَأَصْبَحَ أَحْمَدٌ فِيْنَا عَزِيْزاً
> وَلَمْ يَأْتِ جَوْراً وَلَمْ يَعْتُفِ
> فَيَا أَيُّهَا الْمُوعِدُوهُ سَفَاهاً
> وَمَا آمِنُ اللهَ كَالأَخْوَفٍ
> أَلَسْتُمْ تَخَافُونَ أَدْنَى الْعَذَابِ
> وَأَنْ تُصْرَعُوا تَحْتَ أَسْيَافِهِ
> كَمَصْرَعٍ كَعْبٍ أَبِي الأَشْرَفِ
> وَأَعْرَضَ كَالْجَمَلِ الأَجْنَفِ
> غَدَاةَ رَأَى اللهُ طُغْيَانَهُ
> بِوَحْىٍ إِلَى عَبْدِهِ مُلْطَفِ
> بِأَنْيَضَ ذِي هَّةٍ مُرْهَفٍ
> مَتَى يُنْعَ كَعْبُ لَهَا تَذْرِفِ
> فَائَتْ عُيُونٌ لَهُ مُعْولاتٌ
> فَإِنَّا مِنَ النَّوْحِ لَمْ نَشْتَفٍ
> وَقُلْنَ لِأَحْمَد ذَرْنا قَلِيْلاً
> دُحُوراً عَلَى رَغْمِ الآنُفِ
> فَخَلَّاهُمْ ثُمَّ قَالَ الْعَنُوا
> وَكَانُوا بِدَارِ ذَوِي زُخْرِفِ
> وَأَجْلَى النَّضِيْرَ إِلَى غُرْبَة
> عَلَى كُلٌّ ذِي دُبْرٍ أَعْجَفِ
> إِلَى أَذْرِعَاتٍ رِدَافاً وَهُمْ
> فَأَنْزَلَ جِبْرِيْلُ فِي قَتْلِهِ
> فَدَسَّ الرَّسُولُ رَسُولاً لَهُ

I knew, and whoever is discerning knows,
the firm words from which there is no escape.
And truly I was certain, and I turned aside from nothing,
before Allah, the Compassionate, the Most Compassionate.
Letters taught among the believers,
by which He chose Ahmad al-Mustafa.
A noble station and a lofty standing,
and Ahmad became mighty among us.
He brought no injustice, nor did he swerve.
O you who threaten him in folly,
he who has no fear of Allah is the one most in danger.
Do you not fear the least of the punishment,
and that you be felled beneath his swords
as Ka'b, Abu al-Ashraf, was felled?
He turned away like a wayward camel
on the morning when Allah beheld his tyranny,
by a revelation gently sent to His servant,
and by a white, keen, sharpened blade.
When Ka'b's death is announced, the eyes brim over,
and eyes came to him wailing,
"For we have not been healed of lamenting."
They said to Ahmad, "Leave us a little,"
driven off in spite of their noses.
So he left them and then said, "Curse them,"
though they had dwelt in a house of splendor.
And he drove al-Nadir out into exile,
every one upon a lean and worn-out mount,
away to Adhri'at, riding behind one another.
So Jibril came down concerning his killing,
and the Messenger sent a messenger of his own against him.

And Ka'b ibn Malik said, recalling the expulsion of Banu al-Nadir:

> كَذَلِكَ الدَّهْرُ ذُو صَرْفٍ يَدُورُ
> لَقَدْ حَزِيَتْ بِغَدْرَتِهَا الْحُبُورُ
> عَزِيْزِ أَمْرُهُ أَمْرٌ كِيْرُ
> وَجَاءَهُمُ مِنَ اللهِ الَّذِيْرُ
> وَآيَاتِ مُبَنَةً تُنْرُ
> نَذِيْرٌ صَادِقٌ أَدَّى كِتَاباً
> وَأَنْتَ بِمُنْكَرٍ مِنَّا جَدِبْرُ
> فَقَالُوا مَا أَتَيْتَ بِأَمْرِ صِدْقِ
> يُصَدِّقُنِي بِهِ الْفَهِمُ الْخَيْرُ
> فَقَالَ بَلَى لَقَدْ أَدَّيْتُ حَقّاً
> وَمَنْ يَكْفُرْ بِهِ يُخْزَ الْكَفُورُ
> فَمَنْ يَتْبَعْهُ يُهْدَ لِكُلِّ رُشْدِ
> وَحَادَ بِهِمْ عَنِ الْحَقِّ الْتُّفُورُ
> فَلَمَّا أُشْرِبُوا غَدْراً وَكُفْراً
> وَكَانَ اللهُ يَحْكُمُ لاَ يَحُورُ
> وَكَانَ نَصِيْرُهُ نِعْمَ النَّصِيْرُ
> فَأَيَّدَهُ وَسَلَّطَهُ عَلَيْهِمْ
> وَذَلِكَ أَنَّهُمْ كَفَرُوا بِرَبِّ
> وَقَدْ أُوتُوا مَعَاً فَهْماً وَعِلْماً
> أَرَى اللهُ النَّبِيَّ بِرَأيِ صِدْقٍ
> فَقُودِرَ مِنْهُمُ كَعْبٌ صَرِيْعاً فَذَلَّتْ بَعْدَ مَصْرَعِهِ النَّضِيْرُ
> عَلَى الْكَفَّيْنِ ثُمَّ وَقَدْ عَلَتْهُ
> بِأَيْدِيْنَا مُشَهَّرَةٌ ذُكُورُ
> إِلَى كَعْبِ أَخَا كَعْبٍ يَسِيْرُ
> بِأَمْرِ مُحَمَّدٍ إِذْ دَسَّ لَيْلاً
> وَمَحْمُودٌ أَخُو ثِقَةٍ جَسُورُ
> فَمَاكَرَهُ فَأَنْزَلَهُ بِمَكْرٍ
> أَبَارَهُمُ بِمَا اجْتَرَمُوا الْمُثِيْرُ
> فَتِلْكَ بَنُو النَّضِيْرِ بِدَارِ سَوْءٍ
> رَسُولُ اللهِ وَهْوَ بِهِمْ بَصِيْرُ
> غَدَاةَ أَتَاهُمُ فِي الزَّحْفِ رَهْواً
> عَلَى الأَعْدَاءِ وَهْوَ لَهُمْ وَزِيْرُ
> وَغَسَّانُ الْحُمَاةُ مُوَازِرُوهُ
> وَحَالَفَ أَمْرَهُمْ كَذِبٌ وَزُوْرُ
> فَقَالَ السَّلْمُ وَيْحَكُمْ فَصَدُّوا
> لِكُلِّ ثَلاَثَةٍ مِنْهُمْ بَعِيْرُ
> فَذَاقُوا غِبَّ أَمْرِهِمُ وَبَالاً
> وَغُوْدِرَ مِنْهُمُ نَخْلٌ وَدُوْرُ
> وَأُجْلُوا عَامِدِيْنَ لِقَيْنُقَاعٍ

Thus is time, possessed of a turning that revolves.
The rabbis were disgraced by their own treachery.
Mighty is His command, a command that is great,
and there came to them from Allah the warning,
and clear signs that illuminate.
A truthful warner delivered a Book,
"and you are worthy of denial from us."
They said, "You have not come with a matter of truth."
He said, "Rather, I have delivered a truth
which the man of good understanding confirms for me.
Whoever follows it is guided to every right course,
and whoever disbelieves in it, the ungrateful one is disgraced."
When they were made to drink treachery and unbelief,
their aversion turned them away from the truth.
Allah gives judgment, and He does not swerve.
He strengthened him and gave him power over them,
and His helper is the best of helpers,
and that was because they disbelieved in a Lord,
though they had been given understanding and knowledge together.
Allah showed the Prophet a true resolve,
and Ka'b was overpowered among them and struck down,
and after his fall al-Nadir was humbled,
upon the two palms, and then it rose over him,
in our hands, bright and keen blades,
when, by the command of Muhammad, one was sent by night
to Ka'b, a brother of Ka'b, journeying to him,
and Mahmud, a brother of trust, daring.
He outwitted him and brought him down by a stratagem.
So there are Banu al-Nadir in an evil abode,
the Stirrer destroyed them for what they had committed,
on the morning the Messenger of Allah came upon them
in the advance, moving calmly, seeing them clearly,
and the protecting men of Ghassan supported him
against the enemies, and he was their aid.
He called them to peace, but they turned away,
and their affair was allied to lies and falsehood.
So they tasted the outcome of their affair, a ruin,
one camel for every three of them,
and palm trees and houses were left behind of theirs,
and they were driven out, heading for Qaynuqa'.

Then came the expedition of Dhat al-Riqa' in the fourth year.

The Messenger of Allah remained in Medina after the campaign against Banu al-Nadir through the month of Rabi' al-Akhir and part of Jumada al-Ula, then he raided Najd, intending Banu Muharib and Banu Tha'labah of Ghatafan.

It was called the expedition of Dhat al-Riqa' because in it they patched their banners; and it is said that Dhat al-Riqa' is a tree in that place called Dhat al-Riqa'.

There he met a gathering from Ghatafan. The two sides drew near one another, but there was no fighting between them, and each side feared the other, so much that the Messenger of Allah led the people in the prayer of fear, and then departed with them.
