# Dhat al-Riqa, Badr al-Akhirah, and a Mother Buried

Concerning that prayer, it is related on the authority of Ja'far ibn Muhammad, from his father, from his forebears:

«أنّ رسول الله صلَّى صلاة الخوف بأصحابه في غَزْوة ذات الرِّقَاعِ، ففرَّق أصحابه فريقين، أقام فرقة بإزاء العدوّ، وفرقة خلفه، وكَبَّر فكبَّروا، وقرأ فأنْصَتُوا، وركع فركعوا، وسجد فسجدوا، ثُمَّ اسْتَتَمَّ رسول الله قائماً، وصلّى الَّذين خلفه ركعةً أخرى لأنفسهم، وسلَّم بعضهم على بعض، ثُمَّ خرجوا إلى مقام أصحابهم فقاموا بإزاء العدوّ، وجاء أصحابهم فقاموا خلف رسول الله، فكَبَّر وكبَّروا، وقرأ فأنصتوا، وركع فركعوا، وسجد فسجدوا، وجلس وتشهَّد فجلسوا، ثُمَّ سلَّم، فقاموا فصلُّوا لأنفسهم ركعةً، ثُمَّ سلَّم بعضهم على بعض، وانصرفوا»

"The Messenger of Allah prayed the prayer of fear with his companions in the expedition of Dhat al-Riqa'. He divided his companions into two parties, stationing one party facing the enemy and one party behind him. He pronounced the takbir and they pronounced it, he recited and they listened, he bowed and they bowed, he prostrated and they prostrated. Then the Messenger of Allah rose and remained standing, and those behind him prayed a further rak'ah by themselves and gave the salutation to one another. They then went out to the position of their companions and stood facing the enemy, and their companions came and stood behind the Messenger of Allah. He pronounced the takbir and they pronounced it, he recited and they listened, he bowed and they bowed, he prostrated and they prostrated, he sat and made the tashahhud and they sat, then he gave the salutation. They rose and prayed a rak'ah by themselves, then gave the salutation to one another and departed."

It is said that a man of Banu Muharib named Ghawrath said to his people of Ghatafan and Muharib: "Shall I not kill Muhammad for you?" They said: "Yes; and how will you kill him?" He said: "I shall take him unawares."

He came to the Messenger of Allah while he was seated, with the sword of the Messenger of Allah in his lap. He said: "O Muhammad, may I look at this sword of yours?" He said: "Yes." The sword was ornamented with silver. The man took it and drew it, then began to brandish it and to resolve upon the Prophet, and Allah restrained him. He said: "O Muhammad, do you not fear me, with the sword in my hand?" The Messenger of Allah said:

«لا؛ إنَّ الله يمنعني منك»

"No; Allah protects me from you."

So he returned the sword. Concerning this Allah sent down:

﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا اذْكُرُوا نِعْمَتَ اللَّهِ عَلَيْكُمْ إِذْ هَمَّ قَوْمٌ أَنْ يَبْسُطُوا إِلَيْكُمْ أَيْدِيَهُمْ فَكَفَّ أَيْدِيَهُمْ عَنكُمْ وَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَعَلَى اللَّهِ فَلْيَتَوَكَّلِ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ﴾ [المائدة: ١١]

"O you who believe, remember the favour of Allah upon you, when a people resolved to stretch out their hands against you, and He restrained their hands from you. And fear Allah, and upon Allah let the believers rely."

The Messenger of Allah returned to Medina and remained there for the rest of Jumada al-Ula, and Jumada al-Akhirah, and Rajab.

Then came the expedition of Badr al-Akhirah, in Sha'ban of the fourth year. Abu Sufyan and the disbelievers of Quraysh had appointed that place for an encounter, so the Messenger of Allah went out in Sha'ban to keep the appointment of Abu Sufyan, until he halted at Badr, and he remained eight nights awaiting him. Abu Sufyan went out with the people of Makkah until he halted in the region of al-Zahran, and it is said at 'Usfan. He saw weakness in his companions and turned back, then said: "O company of Quraysh, nothing will set you right except a year of plenty, in which you may pasture upon the trees and drink milk. This year of yours is a year of drought, and I am turning back, so turn back." The people turned back, and the people of Makkah named them "the army of the sawiq," saying: "You went out only to drink sawiq."

The Messenger of Allah stayed on, awaiting Abu Sufyan, until news of his withdrawal reached him, and then he returned to Medina.

'Abdullah ibn Rawaha said concerning that:

وَعَدْنَا أَبَا سُفْيَانَ بَدْراً وَلَمْ نَجِدْ ... لِمِيْعَادِهِ صِدْقاً وَمَا كَانَ وَافِيَا
فَأُقْسِمُ لَوْ وَافَيْتَنَا فَلَقِيْتَنَا ... لَأُبْتَ ذَمِيْماً وَافْتَقَدْتَ الْمَوَالِيَا
تَرَكْنَا بِهِ أَوْصَالَ عُتْبَةَ وَابْنِهِ ... وَعَمْراً أَبَا جَهْلٍ تَرَكْنَاهُ ثَاوِيَا
عَصَيْتُمْ رَسُولَ اللهِ أُفٍّ لِدِيْنِكُمْ ... وَأَمْرِكُمُ السَّوْءِ الَّذِي كَانَ غَاوِيَا
فَإِنِّي وَإِنْ عَنَّفْتُمُوْنِي لَقَائِلٌ ... فِدًى لِرَسُولِ اللهِ أَهْلِي وَمَالِيَا
أَطَعْنَاهُ لَمْ نَعْدِلْهُ فِيْنَا بِغَيْرِهِ ... شِهَاباً لَنَا فِي ظُلْمَةِ اللَّيْلِ هَادِيَا

"We appointed Badr with Abu Sufyan, and we found in his appointment no truthfulness, nor was he faithful to it.
I swear, had you kept the appointment and met us, you would have returned blameworthy and bereft of your allies.
There we left the severed limbs of 'Utbah and his son, and 'Amr, Abu Jahl, we left him lying dead.
You disobeyed the Messenger of Allah; fie upon your religion and upon that evil affair of yours which was misguided.
As for me, though you rebuke me, I still say: my family and my wealth be a ransom for the Messenger of Allah.
We obeyed him, and set no other in his place among us, a blazing star guiding us in the darkness of the night."

Before this the Messenger of Allah had already dealt a blow to Banu al-Nadir of the Jews. Islam spread abroad, and the Messenger of Allah remained in Medina after his return from Badr, from the appointment of Abu Sufyan, a full year, and entered upon another.

When the Messenger of Allah returned to Medina he remained there some months until the month of Dhu al-Hijjah had passed, and the polytheists had charge of that pilgrimage. Then the Messenger of Allah set out to raid Dumat al-Jandal, and he returned before reaching it, having met no hostility.

In the fourth year of the pure Hijra occurred the death of Fatima bint Asad, the mother of the Commander of the Faithful (ع), and she is Fatima bint Asad ibn Hashim ibn 'Abd Manaf.

Al-Waqidi said: she was the first woman to accept Islam after Khadija al-Kubra (ع).

Al-Waqidi said: she was the first woman to emigrate from Makkah to Medina, walking on foot and barefoot.

Ibn 'Abbas (رض) said: the Messenger of Allah used to visit her and take his midday rest in her house, and she was a righteous woman.

Among what is related from 'Ali ibn Ahmad ibn al-Husayn al-Bayhaqi, from Abu 'Abdallah, it is said:

«سَمِعَتْ فاطِمَة بنت أَسَد رسول الله يقول: يُحْشر النَّاس يوم القيامة عُراة حُفاة. فقالت: واسَوْءَتاه. فقال رسول الله: إِنِّي أَسْأَلُ الله تعالى أنْ يَبْعَثَكِ كاسيةً. قال: وسمعته يذكر عذاب القبر، فقالت: واضَعْفاه. فقال رسول الله: إِنِّي أَسْأَلُ الله تعالى أَنْ يَكْفِيَكِ ذلك»

"Fatima bint Asad heard the Messenger of Allah say: 'The people will be gathered on the Day of Resurrection naked and barefoot.' She said: 'Oh, the shame of it!' The Messenger of Allah said: 'I ask Allah, exalted be He, to raise you clothed.' And she heard him mention the punishment of the grave, and she said: 'Oh, my weakness!' The Messenger of Allah said: 'I ask Allah, exalted be He, to spare you that.'"

Mujahid said: she was the first Hashimite woman to give birth to a Hashimite successor.

'Ikrima said: she was circumambulating the House while pregnant with the Commander of the Faithful (ع), and the pangs of labour seized her, and the door of the Ka'ba was opened for her, and she gave birth to him within it. This has already been mentioned.

Al-Waqidi said: the Messenger of Allah attended her funeral, and commanded them to shroud her in his own shirt, and he descended into her grave and lay down in it, and said:

«أردتُ لئن يوسِّعه الله تعالى عليها، إنَّه ما نفعني أَحَدٌ نَفْعَها، وَنَفْعَ أَبِي طَالِبٍ»

"I intended that Allah, exalted be He, might widen it for her. Truly no one has benefited me as she benefited me, and as Abu Talib benefited me."

He was heard, when he had laid her in her grave, saying:

«ابنكِ ابنكِ؛ عليٌّ عليٌّ»

"Your son, your son; 'Ali, 'Ali."

He was asked about that, and he said: "The two angels asked her: 'Who is your Lord?' She said: 'Allah.' They said: 'Who is your prophet?' She said: 'Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah.' They said to her: 'Who is your Imam?' And she was perplexed, so I said to her: 'Your son, your son.' She said: ''Aqil.' Then it was said to her: ''Ali, 'Ali.'"

The expedition of al-Khandaq was in the month of Shawwal of the fifth year of the Hijra.
