# Digging the Trench

Its cause was this. A number of the Jews had grown embittered, among them Salam ibn Abi al-Huqayq al-Nadari, Huyayy ibn Akhtab al-Nadari, Kinana ibn al-Rabi' ibn Abi al-Huqayq al-Nadari, Hawdha ibn Qays al-Wa'ili and Abu 'Ammar al-Wa'ili, together with a company of Banu al-Nadir and Banu Wa'il. They set out until they came upon the Quraysh at Mecca and summoned them to war against the Messenger of Allah, saying:

> «إِنَّا سنكون معكم عليه، حتَّى نَسْتَأصله»

"We will stand with you against him until we uproot him."

The Quraysh answered them:

> «يا معشر يهود؛ إِنَّكم أهل الكِتابِ الأَوَّل، والعِلْم بما أصبحنا نختلف فيه نحن ومحمَّد، أَفَدِيْنُنا خَيْرٌ أم دِينه؟»

"O company of Jews, you are the people of the first Book, and you possess knowledge of the matter over which we and Muhammad now differ. Is our religion better, or his?"

They said:

> «بل دِينكم خيرٌ من دِينه، وأنتم أَوْلى بالحقِّ منه»

"Rather your religion is better than his, and you have a greater claim to the truth than he."

When that was said to the Quraysh it pleased them, and they answered the call to make war on the Messenger of Allah. They gathered for it and bound themselves to it by appointment. Then that same company of Jews, who were the ones who stirred up the Confederates, went out to Ghatafan of Qays 'Aylan and summoned them likewise to war against the Messenger of Allah. They informed them that they would stand with them against him, and that the Quraysh had already agreed to the same, and so Ghatafan joined them in it.

The Quraysh marched out under their commander Abu Sufyan ibn Harb. Ghatafan marched out under 'Uyayna ibn Hisn ibn Hudhayfa ibn Badr with Banu Fazara, al-Harith ibn 'Awf ibn Abi Haritha al-Murri with Banu Murra, and Mis'ar ibn Rukhayla with those of his people from Ashja' ibn Rayth ibn Ghatafan who followed him.

When the Messenger of Allah heard of them and of the design upon which they had agreed, he set a trench about Medina. He himself worked in it, to encourage the Muslims toward the reward, and the Muslims worked in it with him. 'Ali (ع) and his followers were of all people the most unsparing in toil and labour in it, while among a party of the hypocrites there was slackness in the work.

A hard ridge of rock in the trench resisted them, and they complained of it to the Messenger of Allah. He called for a vessel of water, spat into it, then supplicated with what Allah willed, and then sprinkled that water upon that ridge of rock. Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah al-Ansari said, in what is narrated from him:

> «فوالذي بعثه بالحقِّ نبياً، لانهالت حتَّى عادت كالكَثِيب، لا تردُّ فَأْساً ولا مِسْحاة»

"By Him who sent him with the truth as a prophet, it crumbled away until it became like a sand dune, turning back neither axe nor spade."

It is related of the sister of al-Nu'man ibn Bashir that she said:

"My mother called me and gave me a handful of dates, then said: «أي بُنَيَّةٍ؛ اذهبي إلى أبيك وخالك عبد الله بن رَوَاحَة بغدائهما» 'My little daughter, go to your father and your maternal uncle 'Abd Allah ibn Rawaha with their midday meal.' As she passed by the Messenger of Allah he said to her: «تعالي يا بُنَيَّةٍ هاتي ما معك» 'Come here, little daughter, bring what you have with you.' So I poured it into his two palms, and it did not fill them. He called for a garment, and it was spread out for him, then he called for the dates and they were scattered upon it. Then he ordered his crier, and he called out to those who were in the trench. They came and ate until they were satisfied, and the more they ate the more the dates increased, until they were falling from the edges of the garment."

Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah said:

"I bade my wife slaughter and roast a sheep, and she prepared a little food with it. When the Messenger of Allah left off his work I invited him to come away with me. He called out to the people, and they came away with him. We brought the Messenger of Allah the food and the sheep, and he blessed it and named Allah, exalted be He, over it. Then he ate, and the people came to it in turn: whenever one group had finished they rose and others came, until all the people of the trench had taken their fill of it."

Salman al-Farisi (رض) said:

"I struck the pickaxe into a part of the trench, and a rock proved too hard for me. The Messenger of Allah took the pickaxe from my hand and struck with it three strokes, and three flashes of light shone forth in it. I said: 'What is this, O Messenger of Allah?' He said: «أورأيت ذلك يا سَلْمان؟» 'Did you see that, O Salman?' I said: 'Yes, may my father and mother be your ransom.' He said:

> «أما الأُوْلى فإِنّ اللهَ فَتَحَ عليَّ بها اليَمَن، وأمَّا الثّانية فإنَّ اللهَ فَتَحَ عليَّ بها الشَّام والمغرب، وأمَّا الثّالثة فإِنّ اللهَ فَتَحَ عليَّ بها المشرق»

'As for the first, by it Allah has opened Yemen to me. As for the second, by it Allah has opened to me the Levant and the West. As for the third, by it Allah has opened to me the East.'"

When the Messenger of Allah had finished the trench, the Quraysh came on until they encamped at the meeting of the watercourses at Ruma, between al-Jurf and Zaghaba, with ten thousand of their confederates and their followers from Banu Kinana and the people of Tihama. Ghatafan and those of the people of Najd with them came on until they encamped at Dhanab Naqma, beside Uhud.

The Messenger of Allah went out with three thousand of the Muslims until they set their backs to Sal', and he pitched his camp there with the trench between him and the enemy. He gave orders concerning the children and the women, and they were placed in the fortified towers.

Then Huyayy ibn Akhtab al-Nadari, the Jew, went out until he came to Ka'b ibn Asad al-Qurazi, who held the compact and covenant of Banu Qurayza and had made a truce with the Messenger of Allah on behalf of his people, contracting and covenanting with him upon it. Huyayy said to them:

> «إنّي قد أتيتكم بعزِّ الدَّهر»

"I have come to you with the glory of the age."

He did not leave off until they answered him, and they broke the compact and the bond of protection that stood between them and the Messenger of Allah.

The Messenger of Allah then summoned Sa'd ibn Mu'adh, chief of al-Aws, Sa'd ibn 'Ubada, chief of al-Khazraj, 'Abd Allah ibn Rawaha, and Khawwat ibn Jubayr, brother of Banu 'Amr ibn 'Awf, and said:

> «اذهبوا حتَّى تنظروا، أَحَقٌّ ما بَلَغنا عن هؤلاء القوم أم لا؟»

"Go and see whether what has reached us concerning these people is true or not."

They went out until they came to them and found them at the foulest of what had been reported. They said:

> «مَنْ رسول الله؟ لا عهد بيننا وبين محمَّد ولا عَقْد»

"Who is the Messenger of Allah? There is no covenant between us and Muhammad, and no compact."

They spoke abusively of the Messenger of Allah; Sa'd ibn Mu'adh reviled them, and they reviled him. The companions of the Messenger of Allah returned and told him the news of the people and the state they were in, and the Messenger of Allah said:

> «الله أكبر، أبشروا يا معشر المسلمين»

"Allah is greatest. Rejoice, O company of Muslims."

At that the trial grew heavy and the fear grew severe. The enemy came upon them from above them and from below them, and hypocrisy showed itself. Some of the hypocrites said:

> «كان محمَّد يَعِدنا أن نأكل كنوز كِسْرِى وقَيْصَرَ، وها نحن الآن لا يأمن الواحد منَّا على نفسه أن يذهب إلى الغائط»

"Muhammad used to promise us that we would eat the treasures of Chosroes and Caesar, and here we are now, when not one of us feels safe enough to go out to relieve himself."

And some of them came to the Prophet and said:

> «إنَّ بيوتنا عورة من العدوّ»

"Our houses are exposed to the enemy."

The believers were shaken with a severe shaking, as Allah, exalted be He, has related in Surat al-Ahzab:

> ﴿هُنَالِكَ ابْتُلِيَ الْمُؤْمِنُونَ وَزُلْزِلُوا زِلْزَالاً شَدِيدًا﴾

"There the believers were tried and shaken with a severe shaking."

The polytheists remained encamped some twenty odd nights, and there was no fighting except the exchange of arrows. The polytheists looked at the trench and said:

> «إنّ هذه الحيلة ما كانت العرب تعرفها»

"This is a stratagem the Arabs never knew."

Then there came forward from among the polytheists 'Amr ibn 'Abd Wudd ibn Abi Qays, one of Banu 'Amir ibn Lu'ayy, who was among the most courageous of the people and among the most awe inspiring of them, so that their whole gathering acknowledged this of him. He had been present at Badr with the polytheists and had been covered with wounds there, yet escaped with his life, and he had not been present at Uhud. He wished now to distinguish himself among the Quraysh by what he would do, and so he marked himself with a token by which he would be known. There came forward with him 'Ikrima ibn Abi Jahl and Hubayra ibn Abi Wahb, both of the Makhzum, and Dirar ibn al-Khattab ibn Mirdas, brother of Banu Muharib ibn Fihr. They had put on their weapons and made themselves ready for the encounter.
