# Judgment on Banu Qurayza

When the confederates had withdrawn and the morning came, the Messenger of Allah turned back from the trench toward Medina, and the Muslims with him, and they laid down their arms. At the hour of noon Gabriel (ع) came to him and said:

«أَوَقَدْ وَضَعْتَ السِّلاحَ يا محمَّد؟»

"Have you laid down your weapons, O Muhammad?"

He said: «نَعَمْ» — "Yes."

Gabriel said:

«مَا وَضَعَتِ الْمَلَائِكَةُ السِّلاحَ بَعْدُ، وما رجعتُ الآنَ إِلاَّ مِنْ طلبِ القومِ، وإِنَّ اللهَ يَأْمُرُكَ بالمسيرِ إلى بني قُرَيْظَةَ، فإِنِّي عامدٌ إليهم فَمُزَلْزِلٌ أقدامَهم»

"The angels have not yet laid down their weapons. I have returned only now from the pursuit of the people. Allah commands you to march against the Banu Qurayza. I am heading toward them, and I shall shake their footing."

So the Messenger of Allah ordered a muezzin, who called out among the people:

«مَنْ كان سامعاً مُطيعاً، فلا يُصَلِّيَنَّ العصرَ إلاَّ في بني قُرَيْظَةَ»

"Whoever hears and obeys shall not pray the afternoon prayer except at the Banu Qurayza."

The Messenger of Allah sent Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) ahead to the Banu Qurayza with his standard, and the people raced after it. Ali (ع) went forward, and when he drew near their strongholds he heard from them foul speech against the Messenger of Allah. He turned back to meet him and sought to hold him at a distance, so that he would not hear what their fools had said. But the Messenger of Allah came on until he was near their fortresses, and he said:

«يا إخوانَ القِرَدَةِ، هل أخزاكم اللهُ وأنزلَ بكم النِّقْمةَ؟»

"O brothers of apes, has Allah not disgraced you and brought His retribution down upon you?"

They said: «يا أبا القاسم؛ ما كنتَ جَهُولاً» — "O Abu al-Qasim, you were never one given to ignorance."

The Messenger of Allah encamped at a well among their wells, in the quarter of the properties of the Banu Qurayza, called Bi'r Ana; it is also said Bi'r Unna. He besieged them twenty-five nights, and Allah cast terror into their hearts.

Huyayy ibn Akhtab had entered the fortress with them when Quraysh and Ghatafan turned back, keeping faith with Ka'b ibn Asad in what he had pledged to him. When they were certain that the Messenger of Allah would not depart from them until he had settled the matter with them, Ka'b ibn Asad said to them:

«يا معشرَ يهودَ؛ قد نزلَ بكم من الأمرِ ما تَرَوْنَ، وإِنِّي عارضٌ عليكم خِلالاً ثلاثاً، فخُذوا أَيَّها شِئتُم»

"O company of Jews, there has descended upon you the affair you now see. I set before you three courses; take whichever of them you wish."

They said: «وما هي؟» — "And what are they?"

He said:

«تُتابعُ هذا الرَّجُلَ على أمرِهِ، فواللهِ إنَّكم لتعلمونَ أنَّه لَنَبِيٌّ مُرْسَلٌ، وأنَّه لَلَّذي تجدونَهُ في كتابِكم، فتأمنونَ على دمائِكم وأموالِكم وأبنائِكم ونسائِكم»

"That you follow this man in his command, for by Allah, you know that he is a prophet sent, and that he is the one you find described in your Book, and so you will be safe in your lives, your wealth, your children, and your women."

They said: «لا نفعلُ، ولا نُفارقُ حكمَ التَّوراةِ أبداً» — "We will not do it, and we will never part from the ruling of the Torah."

He said:

«فهلمّوا نقتلْ أبناءَنا ونساءَنا، ثُمَّ نخرجْ إلى محمَّدٍ وأصحابِهِ مُصْلِتِينَ السُّيُوفَ، لم نترك وراءَنا ثَقَلاً، فتكونَ لنا أو لهُ، فإن ظفرنا فلنَجِدَنَّ النِّساءَ والأَبْناءَ»

"Then come, let us kill our sons and our women, and go out to Muhammad and his companions with drawn swords, leaving no burden behind us, so that the matter will be ours or his. If we prevail, we shall surely find women and children again."

They said: «نقتلُ هؤلاءِ المساكينَ! فما خيرُ العيشِ بعدَهم؟!» — "Shall we kill these poor souls? What good is life after them?"

He said:

«فإن أبيتُم ذلك، فهذه ليلةُ السَّبْتِ، وعسى أن يكونَ محمَّدٌ وأصحابُهُ قد أَمِنونا فيها، فانزلوا فلعلَّنا نُصيبُ منهم غِرَّةً»

"If you refuse that also, then this is the night of the Sabbath, and perhaps Muhammad and his companions feel safe from us in it. Go down, and it may be that we catch them unawares."

They said: «نُفْسِدُ سَبْتَنا علينا، ونُحدثُ فيه ما لم يُحدثْ مَن كان قبلَنا، إلاَّ فأصابَهُ ما قد علمتَ من الَمسْخِ!» — "Shall we corrupt our Sabbath for ourselves, and do in it what none before us did, save that there befell him the transformation you know of?"

He said: «ما باتَ رجلٌ منكم منذُ ولدتْهُ أُمُّهُ ليلةً واحدةً من الدَّهْرِ حازماً» — "Not one man of you, since his mother bore him, has passed a single night of his life resolute."

When the siege had exhausted them and Allah had cast terror into their hearts, they asked to come down upon the judgment of the Messenger of Allah. The Aws sprang forward and said: "O Messenger of Allah, they are our allies and not the allies of the Khazraj, and you did yesterday with the allies of the Khazraj what you know." By this they meant the Banu Qaynuqa', whom Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul had asked of him.

The Messenger of Allah said:

«يا معشرَ الأَوْسِ؛ ألا ترضونَ أن يَحكمَ فيهم رجلٌ منكم؟»

"O company of the Aws, will you not be content that a man from among you should judge concerning them?"

They said: "Yes indeed, O Messenger of Allah." He said: «فذاك إلى سَعْدِ بنِ مُعاذٍ» — "Then that is for Sa'd ibn Mu'adh."

His people came to him and mounted him on a donkey over which they had spread a cushion of leather, for he was a large and handsome man, ailing from the arrow that had struck him at the trench. When Sa'd reached the Messenger of Allah and the Muslims, the Messenger of Allah said: «قُومُوا إلى سيِّدِكم» — "Rise for your master."

They rose to him and said to him: "Deal well with your allies." Sa'd said: «يا معشرَ الأنصارِ؛ عليكم عَهْدُ اللهِ وميثاقُهُ أن ترضوا حُكمي؟» — "O company of the Ansar, do you take upon yourselves the covenant of Allah and His pledge that you will accept my judgment?" They said: "Yes."

Then he said:

«يا رسولَ اللهِ؛ فإنِّي أحكمُ فيهم أن تُقتلَ الرِّجالُ، وتُسْبى النِّساءُ والذَّراري، وتُقَسَّمَ الأموالُ»

"O Messenger of Allah, I judge concerning them that the men be killed, that the women and children be taken captive, and that the properties be divided."

The Messenger of Allah said to Sa'd:

«لَقَدْ حَكَمْتَ فِيْهِمْ بِحُكْمِ اللهِ مِنْ فَوْقِ سَبْعَةِ أَرْقِعَةٍ»

"You have judged among them with the judgment of Allah from above seven heavens."

As to why they came down upon the judgment of Sa'd, Ibn Hisham related from one he trusted among the people of knowledge that the Banu Qurayza did not come down until Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) put on his armor and cried out: «يا كتيبةَ الإيمانِ» — "O battalion of faith!" and went forward saying: «واللهِ لا أرجعُ حتَّى يفتحَ اللهُ على رسولِهِ، أو أَذُوقَنَّ ما ذاقَ عمِّي حمزةُ» — "By Allah, I shall not turn back until Allah grants His Messenger the victory, or until I taste what my uncle Hamza tasted," or, "until I open their fortress." When they saw that, they said: "O Muhammad, we come down upon the judgment of Sa'd ibn Mu'adh."

When that had come about and Sa'd ibn Mu'adh had given his judgment, the Messenger of Allah confined them in Medina in the house of a woman of the Banu al-Najjar. Then he went out to the market of Medina and had trenches dug in it, and he sent for them, and their necks were struck at those trenches, brought out to him in groups. Among them were the enemy of Allah, Huyayy ibn Akhtab, and Ka'b ibn Asad, the chief of the people. They were six hundred or seven hundred; it is also said that they were between eight hundred and nine hundred.

When Huyayy ibn Akhtab was brought forward, he came wearing a rose-colored robe of figured cloth which he had torn all over, a fingertip's breadth at every point, so that it could not be stripped from him, his hands bound to his neck with a rope. When he looked upon the Messenger of Allah he said:

«أما واللهِ ما لُمْتُ نَفْسي في عداوتِكَ، ولكنَّهُ مَن يَخْذُلِ اللهَ يُخْذَلْ»

"By Allah, I have not blamed myself for my enmity toward you; but whoever is forsaken by Allah is forsaken."

Then he turned to the people and said:

«أَيُّهَا النَّاسُ؛ إنَّهُ لا بَأْسَ بأمرِ اللهِ، كتابٌ وقَدَرٌ ومَلْحمةٌ كُتِبَتْ على بني إسرائيلَ»

"O people, there is no harm in the decree of Allah. It is a writ, a decree, and a slaughter ordained upon the Children of Israel."

Then he sat down, and his neck was struck. Concerning him Jabal ibn Jawwal al-Tha'labi said:

لَعَمْرُكَ مَا لَامَ ابْنُ أَخْطَبَ نَفْسَهُ / وَلَكِنَّهُ مَنْ يَخْذُلِ اللهَ يُخْذَلِ
لَجَاهَدَ حَتَّى أَبْلَغَ النَّفْسَ عُذْرَهَا / وَقَلْقَلَ يَبْغِي الْعِزَّ كُلَّ مُقَلْقَلِ

"By your life, the son of Akhtab did not blame himself; but whoever is forsaken by Allah is forsaken. He strove until he brought his soul to its excuse, and shook, seeking glory, every shaking thing."

It is said that when the Messenger of Allah had finished with the affair of the Banu Qurayza, the wound of Sa'd ibn Mu'adh burst open and he died a martyr, the mercy of Allah upon him. The Messenger of Allah said:

«إنَّ سَعْداً فُتِحَتْ لهُ أبوابُ السَّماءِ، واهتزَّ لهُ العَرْشُ»

"For Sa'd the gates of heaven were opened, and the Throne trembled for him."

When Sa'd was buried, the Messenger of Allah glorified Allah, and the people glorified with him; then he magnified Allah, and they magnified with him. They said: "O Messenger of Allah, for what did you glorify Allah?" He said:

«لقد تضايقَ على هذا العبدِ الصَّالحِ قبرُهُ، حتَّى فرَّجَهُ اللهُ عنه»

"The grave pressed in upon this righteous servant, until Allah relieved him of it."

Sa'd (رض) was a stout and heavy man, and concerning him a man of the Ansar said:

أَوَمَا اهْتَزَّ عَرْشُ اللهِ مِنْ مَوْتِ هَالِكٍ / سَمِعْنَا بِهِ إِلَّا لِسَعْدٍ أَبِي عَمْرِو

"Has the Throne of Allah ever trembled at the death of any mortal of whom we have heard, save for Sa'd, Abu Amr?"

The Messenger of Allah sent Sa'd ibn Zayd, the brother of the Banu Abd al-Ashhal, with a company of the captives of the Banu Qurayza, and with them he bought horses and weapons. For himself he chose from among their women Rayhana bint Amr ibn Hunafa, one of the women of the Banu Qurayza.

Ka'b ibn Malik, the brother of the Banu Salama, said, recalling the day of the trench and the killing of the Banu Qurayza and the judgment of Sa'd ibn Mu'adh:

وَسَائِلَةٍ تُسَائِلُ مَا لَقِيْنَا / وَلَوْ شَهِدَتْ رَأَتْنَا صَابِرِيْنَا
صَبَرْنَا لَا نَرَى لِلَّهِ عِدْلاً / عَلَى مَا نَابَنَا مُتَوَكِّلِيْنَا
وَكَانَ لَنَا النَّبِيُّ وَزِيْرَ صِدْقٍ / بِهِ نَعْلُو الْبَرِيَّةَ أَجْمَعِيْنَا
نُقَاتِلُ مَعْشَراً ظَلَمُوا وَعَقُّوا / وَكَانُوا بِالْعَدَاوَةِ مُرْصِدِيْنَا
نُعَاجِلُهُمْ إِذَا نَهَضُوا إِلَيْنَا / بِضَرْبٍ يُعْجِلُ الْمُتَسَرِّعِيْنَا
تَرَانَا فِي فَضَافِضَ سَابِغَاتٍ / كَغُدْرَانِ الْمَلَا مُتَسَرْبِلِيْنَا
وَفِي أَيْمَانِنَا بِيْضٌ خِفَافٌ / بِهَا نَشْفِي مِرَاحَ الشَّاغِبِيْنَا
بِبَابِ الْخَنْدَقَيْنِ كَأَنَّ أُسْداً / شَوَابِكُهُنَّ يَحْمِيْنَ الْعَرِيْنَا
فَوَارِسُنَا إِذَا بَكَرُوا وَرَاحُوا / عَلَى الأَعْدَاءِ شُوساً مُعْلِمِيْنَا
لِنَنْصُرَ أَحْمَدَ وَاللهَ حَتَّى / نَكُونَ عِبَادَ صِدْقٍ مُخْلِصِيْنَا
وَيَعْلَمَ أَهْلُ مَكَّةَ حِيْنَ سَارُوا / وَأَحْزَابٌ أَتَوْا مُتَحَزِّبِيْنَا
بِأَنَّ اللهَ لَيْسَ لَهُ شَرِيْكٌ / وَأَنَّ اللهَ مَوْلَى الْمُؤْمِنِيْنَا
كَمَا قَدْ رَدَّكُمْ فَلاًّ شَرِيداً / بِغَيْظِكُمُ خَزَايَا خَائِبِيْنَا
خَزَايَا لَمْ تَنَالُوا ثَمَّ خَيْراً / وَكِدْتُمْ أَنْ تَكُونُوا دَامِرِيْنَا
بِرِيْحٍ عَاصِفٍ هَبَّتْ عَلَيْكُمْ / فَكُنْتُمْ تَحْتَهَا مُتَكَمِّهِيْنَا
فَإِمَّا تَقْتُلُوا سَعْداً سَفَاهاً / فَإِنَّ اللهَ خَيْرُ الْقَادِرِيْنَا
سَيُدْخِلُهُ جِنَاناً طَيِّبَاتٍ / تَكُونُ مُقَامَةً لِلصَّالِحِيْنَا

"Many a woman asks what befell us; had she been present, she would have seen us patient. We were patient, setting up no equal to Allah, trusting in Him through what struck us. The Prophet was for us a true helper, through whom we rise above all creation. We fight a people who wronged and were disobedient, who lay in wait for us with enmity. We meet them swiftly when they rise against us, with blows that hasten the over-hasty. You see us in wide, ample mail, clothed as though in the pools of the open plain. In our right hands are light gleaming blades, with which we cure the frenzy of the riotous. At the gate of the two trenches, as though lions whose claws defend the lair. Our horsemen, when they set out at dawn and at evening, fierce upon the enemy, marked with their signs, that we may aid Ahmad and Allah, until we are true servants, sincere; and that the people of Mecca may know, when they marched, and confederates came banded together, that Allah has no partner, and that Allah is the Protector of the believers. So He turned you back, scattered and dispersed, in your rage, disgraced and disappointed; disgraced, you gained no good there, and you were near to being destroyed by a raging wind that blew upon you, so that beneath it you were left groping. And if you kill Sa'd in your folly, Allah is the best of the powerful; He will admit him to goodly gardens that shall be a dwelling for the righteous."

Hassan ibn Thabit answered him:

هَلْ رَسْمُ دَارِسَةِ الْمَقَامِ بِبَابٍ / مُتَكَلِّمٌ لِمُحَاوِرٍ بِجَوَابٍ
قَفْرٌ عَفَا رِهَمُ السَّحَابِ رُسُومَهُ / وَهُبُوبُ كُلِّ مُطِلَّةٍ مِرْبَابٍ
وَلَقَدْ رَأَيْتُ بِهَا الْحُلُولَ يَزِيْنُهُمْ / بِيْضُ الْوُجُوهِ ثَوَاقِبُ الأَحْسَابِ
فَدَعِ الدِّيَارَ وَذِكْرَ كُلِّ خَرِيْدَةٍ / بَيْضَاءَ آنِسَةِ الْحَدِيْثِ كَعَابٍ
وَاشْكُ الْهُمُومَ إِلَى الْإِلَهِ وَمَا تَرَى / مِنْ مَعْشَرٍ ظَلَمُوا الرَّسُولَ غِضَابٍ
سَارُوا بِأَجْمَعِهِمْ إِلَيْهِ وَأَلَّبُوا / أَهْلَ الْقُرَى وَبَوَادِيَ الأَعْرَابِ
جَيْشٌ عُيَيْنَةُ وَابْنُ حَرْبٍ فِيْهِمُ / مُتَخَمِّطُونَ بِحَلْبَةِ الأَحْزَابِ
حَتَّى إِذَا وَرَدُوا الْمَدِيْنَةَ وَارْتَجَوْا / قَتْلَ الرَّسُولِ وَمَغْنَمَ الْأَسْلَابِ
وَغَدَوْا عَلَيْنَا قَادِرِيْنَ بِأَيْدِيهِمْ / رُدُّوا بِغَيْظِهِمُ عَلَى الأَعْقَابِ
بِهُبُوبِ مُعْصِفَةٍ تُفَرِّقُ جَمْعَهُمْ / وَجُنُودِ رَبِّكَ سَيِّدِ الأَرْبَابِ
فَكَفَى الإِلَهُ الْمُؤْمِنِيْنَ قِتَالَهُمْ / وَأَثَابَهُمْ فِي الأَجْرِ خَيْرَ ثَوَابٍ
مِنْ بَعْدِ مَا قَنِطُوا فَفَرَّقَ جَمْعَهُمْ / تَنْزِيْلُ نَصِّ مَلِيْكِنَا الْوَهَّابِ
وَأَقَرَّ عَيْنَ مُحَمَّدٍ وَصِحَابِهِ / وَأَذَلَّ كُلَّ مُكَذِّبٍ مُرْتَابٍ
عَلِقَ الشَّقَاءُ بِقَلْبِهِ فَفُؤَادُهُ / فِي الْكُفْرِ لَيْسَ بِطَاهِرِ الأَثْوَابِ
عَانِي الْفُؤَادِ مُوَقَّعٌ ذِي رِيبَةٍ / فِي الْكُفْرِ آخِرُ هَذِهِ الأَحْقَابِ

"Does the effaced trace of the dwelling at the gate speak an answer to one who questions it? A waste whose marks the soft rains of the cloud have wiped away, and the gusting of every low, drizzling cloud. I once saw dwellers there adorned, white of face, of shining lineage. So leave the dwellings and the memory of every fair one, bright, delightful in speech, full of youth, and complain of cares to God, and of what you see of a people who wronged the Messenger in their rage. They marched against him all together and roused the people of the villages and the desert Arabs. The army of Uyayna, and Ibn Harb among them, blustering in the arena of the confederates, until, when they came down upon Medina and hoped for the killing of the Messenger and the booty of the spoils, and came at us thinking their hands had power, they were turned back upon their heels in their rage, by the blast of a storm that scattered their gathering, and by the armies of your Lord, the Master of masters. So God sufficed the believers in their fighting and rewarded them with the best of reward, after they had despaired; He scattered their host, by the sending down of the text of our Sovereign, the Bestower. He comforted the eye of Muhammad and his companions and abased every doubting denier. Misery has clung to his heart, so his heart is in unbelief, not clean of garment, worn in heart, marked, full of suspicion, in unbelief to the last of these ages."

Musafi' ibn Abd Manaf ibn Wahb ibn Hudhafa ibn Jumah said, weeping for Amr ibn Abd Wadd and recalling the killing of him by Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع):

عَمْرُو بْنُ عَبْدٍ كَانَ أَوَّلَ فَارِسٍ / جَزَعَ الْمَذَادَ وَكَانَ فَارِسَ يَلْيَلِ
تَسَلُ الرِّجَالَ عَلِيُّ فَارِسَ غَالِبٍ / بِجَنُوبِ سَلْعٍ غَيْرَ نَكْسٍ أَمْيَلِ
سَمْحُ الْخَلَائِقِ مَاجِدٌ ذُو مِرَّةٍ / يَبْغِي الْقِتَالَ بِشِكَّةٍ لَمْ يَنْكُلِ
وَلَقَدْ عَلِمْتُمْ حِيْنَ وَلَّوْا عَنْكُمُ / أَنَّ ابْنَ عَبْدٍ فِيْهِمُ لَمْ يُعْجِلِ
أَوَلَقَدْ تَكَنَّفَتِ الأَسِنَّةُ فَارِساً / يَبْغِي مُقَاتِلَهُ وَلَيْسَ بِمُؤْتَلِي
فَاذْهَبْ عَلِيُّ فَمَا ظَفِرْتَ بِمِثْلِهِ / فَخْراً وَلَا لَاقَيْتَ مِثْلَ الْمُعْضِلِ
نَفْسِي الْفِدَاءُ لِفَارِسٍ مِنْ غَالِبٍ / لَاقَى حِمَامَ الْمَوْتِ لَمْ يَتَحَلْحَلِ
أَعْنِي الَّذِي جَزَعَ الْمَذَادَ بِمُهْرِهِ / طَلَباً لِثَأْرِ مَعَاشِرٍ لَمْ يَخْذُلِ
حَتَّى تَكَنَّفَهُ الْكُمَاةُ وَكُلُّهُمْ / بِجَنُوبِ سَلْعٍ لَيْتَهُ لَمْ يَنْزِلِ

"Amr ibn Abd was the first horseman to cross al-Madhad, and he was the horseman of Yalyal. Ask the men, O Ali, of the horseman of Ghalib, on the southern side of Sal', neither a weakling nor one who swerves. Generous in nature, noble, a man of strength, seeking battle in full armor, never flinching. You knew well, when they turned away from you, that Ibn Abd among them did not hasten off. Spear points closed about a horseman who sought his adversary and spared no effort. So go, Ali; you have not won his like in glory, nor met the like of that hard affair. My soul be the ransom of a horseman of Ghalib, who met the doom of death and did not waver. I mean the one who crossed al-Madhad on his colt, seeking vengeance for a people, never forsaking them, until the champions closed about him, all of them, on the southern side of Sal'. Would that he had never come down there."

And Hubayra ibn Abi Wahb said, weeping for Amr ibn Abd Wadd and recalling the killing of him by Ali (ع):

لَقَدْ عَلِمَتْ عُلْيَا لُؤَيِّ بْنِ غَالِبٍ / لَفَارِسُهَا عَمْرٌو إِذَا نَابَ نَائِبُ
لَفَارِسُهَا عَمْرٌو إِذَا مَا يَسُومُهُ / عَلِيٌّ وَإِنَّ اللَّيْثَ لَا بُدَّ طَالِبُ
عَشِيَّةَ يَدْعُوهُ عَلِيٌّ وَإِنَّهُ / لَفَارِسُهَا إِذْ خَامَ عَنْهُ الْكَتَائِبُ
فَيَا لَهْفَ نَفْسِي إِنَّ عَمْراً تَرَكْتُهُ / بِيَثْرِبَ لَا زَالَتْ هُنَاكَ الْمَصَائِبُ

"The high ones of Lu'ayy ibn Ghalib know well that its horseman was Amr whenever calamity came. Its horseman was Amr, when Ali pressed him hard; and the lion must needs demand his due. On the evening when Ali called him out, he was indeed its horseman, when the squadrons shrank away from him. Alas for me, that I left Amr at Yathrib; may misfortunes never cease to be there."

And Hassan ibn Thabit said concerning the Banu Qurayza:

لَقَدْ لَقِيَتْ قُرَيْظَةُ مَا سَآهَا / وَحَلَّ بِحِصْنِهَا ذُلٌّ ذَلِيْلُ
وَسَعْدٌ كَانَ أَنْذَرَهُمْ بِنُصْحٍ / بِأَنَّ إِلَهَكُمْ رَبٌّ جَلِيْلُ
فَمَا بَرِحُوا بِنَقْضِ الْعَهْدِ حَتَّى / فَلَاهُمْ فِي بِلَادِهِمُ الرَّسُولُ
أَحَاطَ بِحِصْنِهِمْ مِنَّا صُفُوفٌ / لَهُ مِنْ حَرِّ وَقْعَتِهِمْ صَلِيْلُ

"Qurayza met what grieved them, and abject humiliation settled upon their fortress. Sa'd had warned them sincerely that your God is a mighty Lord. Yet they persisted in breaking the covenant, until the Messenger drove them out in their own land. Ranks of ours encircled their fortress, ringing with the heat of the encounter."

Then came the killing of Sallam ibn Abi al-Huqayq. He had been fierce in his enmity toward the Messenger of Allah, so a party of the Khazraj asked permission to kill him, and permission was granted them, and Abdullah ibn Atik was placed over them. They went out until they reached Khaybar and came to the house of Ibn Abi al-Huqayq by night and asked leave to enter. His wife came out to them and said: «مَنْ أنتم؟» — "Who are you?" They said: «قومٌ من العربِ نُريدُ الْمِيرَةَ» — "A people of the Arabs seeking provisions." She said: «ذاكم صاحبُكم» — "That is your man." They entered upon him and found him asleep upon his bed and fell upon him with their swords. His wife screamed, and they went out hastening on their way. The Jews kindled fires and pursued them, but Allah delivered them from their harm, and they came to the Messenger of Allah and informed him of the affair.

Hassan ibn Thabit said concerning the killing of Ka'b ibn al-Ashraf, whose killing has already been mentioned, and concerning the killing of Ibn Abi al-Huqayq:

"O son of al-Huqayq, and you, son of al-Ashraf, / a band came upon you, / bold as lions in their den; / they pressed upon you and struck you down / in the very heart of your own land, / holding every hard thing of no account, / clear-sighted men upholding the religion of their prophet."

The conquest of the Banu Qurayza took place in Dhu al-Qa'da and the opening days of Dhu al-Hijja, and the Messenger of Allah returned to Medina in Dhu al-Hijja.
