# Banu Lahyan, Dhu Qarad, and al-Muraysi

The Messenger of Allah remained in Madinah through Dhu al-Hijjah, Muharram, Safar, and the two months of Rabi'. Then, in Jumada al-Ula, six months after the conquest of Banu Qurayza, he marched against Banu Lahyan, seeking redress for the companions of al-Raji': Khubayb ibn 'Adi and those with him, may Allah have mercy on them. He gave out that he intended the Levant, so that he might take the people unawares, and he pressed the march swiftly until he halted at Ghurran, the dwellings of Banu Lahyan. He found that they had already taken warning and had fortified themselves on the summits of the mountains. Having missed the surprise he had hoped for, he said:

> «لَوْ أَنَّا هَبَطْنَا عُسْفَانَ لَرَأَى أَهْلُ مَكَّةَ أَنَّا قَدْ جِئْنَا مَكَّةَ»

"Had we gone down to 'Usfan, the people of Mecca would have thought that we had come to Mecca."

So he went out with two hundred riders of his companions until he halted at 'Usfan. He then sent two horsemen of his companions ahead until they reached Kura' al-Ghamim, and afterward he turned back toward Madinah.

Jabir ibn 'Abd Allah said that he heard the Messenger of Allah say, as he returned:

> «آيِبُونَ تَائِبُونَ، إِنْ شَاءَ اللهُ لِرَبِّنَا حَامِدُونَ. أَعُوذُ بِاللهِ مِنْ وَعْثَاءِ السَّفَرِ، وَكَآبَةِ الْمُنْقَلَبِ، وَسُوءِ الْمَنْظَرِ فِي الأَهْلِ وَالْمَالِ»

"We return, repentant, worshipping, praising our Lord, if Allah wills. I seek refuge in Allah from the hardship of travel, from the gloom of the homecoming, and from an evil sight in family and property."

Ka'b ibn Malik said concerning the campaign against Banu Lahyan:

> لَوْ أَنَّ بَنِي لِحْيَانَ كَانُوا تَنَاظَرُوا ... لَقُوْا عُصَباً فِي دَارِهِمْ ذَاتِ مَصْدَقِ
> لَقُوْا سَرَعَاناً يملُّ السَّرْبَ رَوْعُهُ ... أَمَامَ طَحُونٍ كَالْمَجَرَّةِ فَيْلَقِ
> وَلَكِنَّهُمْ كَانُوا وِبَاراً تَتَبَّعَتْ ... شِعَابَ حِجَازٍ غَيْرِ ذِي مُتَفَقِ

"Had the sons of Lahyan stood and looked, they would have met in their own dwellings a band of proven worth; they would have met a swift onset whose terror wearies the burrow, before a grinding host like the galaxy in its multitude. But they were rock badgers that took to the ravines of the Hijaz, where none may come together."

Then came the campaign of Dhu Qarad. 'Uyaynah ibn Hisn ibn Hudhayfah ibn Badr al-Fazari raided with horsemen of Ghatafan the milch camels of the Messenger of Allah at al-Ghabah. With the camels were a man of Banu Ghifar and his wife. They killed the man, carried off the woman, and drove away the herd.

The first of the Muslims to take warning of them was Salamah ibn 'Amr ibn al-Akwa'. He had gone out toward al-Ghabah with his bow and his arrows. He cried out against the raiders, kept pace with them from the side, and shot at them, saying as he loosed:

> خُذْهَا وَأَنَا ابْنُ الأَكْوَعْ
> اليَوْمَ يَوْمُ الرُّضَّعْ

"Take it, and I am the son of al-Akwa'! Today is the day of the base-born."

The cry of Ibn al-Akwa' reached the Messenger of Allah, and he ordered his crier in Madinah to call out: "To arms! To arms!" The horses came pouring toward him, and the first of the horsemen to reach him was al-Miqdad ibn al-Aswad. The Messenger of Allah ordered eight horsemen to overtake the raiders and set Sa'd ibn Zayd over them. He himself went out with the rest of the people after them, and with him were his executor 'Ali ibn Abi Talib and his companions and the Muslims.

The first to overtake the enemy was Muhriz ibn Nadlah, of Banu Asad ibn Khuzaymah, who was called al-Akhram. He stood before them and said: "Halt, sons of al-Laki'ah, until those of the people behind you, of the Muhajirun and the Ansar, come up to you." A man of Ghatafan charged him and killed him, and his horse broke loose, and no one could catch it until it returned to Madinah. It is said that Waqqas ibn Mujazziz al-Mudliji was killed with him.

When the horsemen came up together, Abu Qatadah al-Harith ibn Rib'i, of Banu Salamah, charged Habib ibn 'Uyaynah ibn Hisn al-Fazari, killed him, and covered him with his own cloak, then rejoined the people. When the Muslims arrived with the Messenger of Allah, they found Habib al-Fazari shrouded in Abu Qatadah's cloak, and they said the words of return to Allah and cried: "Abu Qatadah has been killed." The Messenger of Allah said:

> «لَيْسَ هُوَ بِأَبِي قَتَادَةَ، وَلَكِنَّهُ قَتِيلٌ لأَبِي قَتَادَةَ مُسَجًّى بِبُرْدِهِ لِيُعْرَفَ أَنَّهُ صَاحِبُهُ»

"It is not Abu Qatadah, but rather a man slain by Abu Qatadah, covered with his cloak so that it might be known that he is the one who killed him."

'Ukkashah ibn Mihsan, of Banu Asad ibn Khuzaymah, overtook Awbar and his son 'Amr ibn Awbar of Ghatafan and ran them both through with a single spear, killing them together; and the Muslims recovered part of the herd.

The Messenger of Allah went on until he halted at the mountain of Dhu Qarad, and the people came up to him one after another and said: "O Messenger of Allah, if only we might overtake the enemy!" He said:

> «إِنَّهُمُ الآنَ لَيُغْبَقُونَ فِي غَطَفَانَ»

"They are by now taking their evening drink in Ghatafan."

The Messenger of Allah then apportioned among his companions one slaughter camel for every hundred men, and they stayed there over it. Afterward he returned with those who were with him until he came to Madinah.

The wife of the Ghifari, whom Ghatafan had seized along with the camels, came riding on a she-camel from the camels of the Messenger of Allah until she reached him. She told him her story and said: "O Messenger of Allah, I have vowed to Allah that I would sacrifice this she-camel if I escaped upon her." The Messenger of Allah smiled and then said:

> «بِئْسَ مَا جَزَيْتِهَا أَنْ حَمَلَكِ اللهُ عَلَيْهَا وَنَجَّاكِ اللهُ عَلَيْهَا، ثُمَّ تَنْحَرِينَهَا! إِنَّهُ لاَ نَذْرَ فِي مَعْصِيَةِ اللهِ وَلاَ فِيمَا لاَ تَمْلِكِينَ، إِنَّمَا هِيَ نَاقَةٌ مِنْ إِبِلِي، فَارْجِعِي إِلَى أَهْلِكِ عَلَى بَرَكَةِ اللهِ»

"That is an evil recompense you have given her, that Allah carried you upon her and delivered you upon her, and then you would slaughter her! There is no vow in disobedience to Allah, nor in what you do not own. She is only a she-camel of my camels, so return to your family with the blessing of Allah."

Hassan ibn Thabit said concerning the affair of Dhu Qarad:

> لَوْلاَ الَّذِي لاَقَتْ وَمَسَّ نُسُورَهَا ... بِجُنُوبِ سَايَةَ أَمْسِ فِي التَّقْوَادِ
> لَلَقِيْنَكُمْ يَحْمِلْنَ كُلَّ مُدَجَّجٍ ... حَامِي الْحَقِيْقَةِ مَاجِدِ الأَجْدَادِ
> وَلَسَرَّ أَوْلاَدَ اللَّقِيْطَةِ أَنَّنَا ... سِلْمٌ غَدَاةَ فَوَارِسِ الْمِقْدَادِ
> كُنَّا ثَمَانِيَةً وَكَانُوا جَحْفَلاً ... لَحِباً فَشُكُّوا بِالرِّمَاحِ بَدَادِ
> كُنَّا مِنَ الْقَوْمِ الَّذِيْنَ يَلُونَهُمْ ... وَيُقَدِّمُونَ عِنَانَ كُلِّ جَوَادِ
> كَلاَّ وَرَبِّ الرَّاقِصَاتِ إِلَى مِنًى ... يَقْطَعْنَ عُرْضَ مَخَارِمِ الأَطْوَادِ
> حَتَّى نُبِيْلَ الْخَيْلَ فِي عَرَصَاتِكُمْ ... وَتَؤُوبَ بِالْمَلِكَاتِ وَالأَوْلاَدِ
> زَهْواً بِكُلِّ مُقَلَّصٍ وَطِمِرَّةٍ ... فِي كُلِّ مُعْتَرَكٍ عَطَفْنَ وَوَادِ
> أَفْنَى دَوَابِرَهَا وَلاحَ مُتُونَهَا ... يَوْمٌ تُقَادُ بِهِ وَيَوْمُ طِرَادِ
> فَكَذَاكَ إِنَّ جِيَادَنَا مَلْبُونَةٌ ... وَالْحَرْبُ مُشْعَلَةٌ بِرِيْحِ غَوَادِ
> وَسُيُوفُنَا بِيْضُ الْحَدَائِدِ تَجْتَلِي ... جُنَنَ الْحَدِيْدِ وَهَامَةَ الْمُرْتَادِ
> أَخَذَ الْإِلَهُ عَلَيْهِمُ لِحَرَامِهِ ... وَلِعِزَّةِ الرَّحْمَنِ بِالأَسْدَادِ
> كَانُوا بِدَارٍ نَاعِمِيْنَ فَبُدِّلُوا ... أَيَّامَ ذِي قَرَدٍ وُجُوهَ عِبَادِ

"Were it not for what the horses met, and what touched the pads of their hooves, in the southern parts of Sayah yesterday in the driving of the herd, they would have met you bearing every mailed warrior, guardian of the truth, glorious of forefathers. It would have delighted the sons of the foundling woman that we were at peace on the morning of the horsemen of al-Miqdad. We were eight and they were a swarming host, yet they were pierced with the spears and scattered. We were of the people who press close upon them and thrust forward the rein of every steed. No, by the Lord of the camels that hasten to Mina, cutting across the passes of the mountains, we shall water our horses in your courtyards and return with the captive women and the children, exulting with every lean and long-bodied mare in every field of battle they have wheeled through, and every valley. What has worn away their hooves and marked their backs is a day of leading and a day of pursuit. Even so, our steeds are fed on milk, while war is kindled by a morning wind. Our swords, white of iron, lay bare the shields of iron and the skull of him who seeks the fight. Allah has seized them for the sake of His sanctuary and for the might of the Merciful, with barriers set against them. They dwelt in ease, and in the days of Dhu Qarad their state was changed, and they became faces of bondsmen."

Ka'b ibn Malik said on the day of Dhu Qarad:

> أَتَحْسَبُ أَوْلاَدُ اللَّقِيْطَةِ أَنَّنَا ... عَلَى الْخَيْلِ لَسْنَا مِثْلَهُمْ فِي الْفَوَارِسِ
> وَإِنَّا أُنَاسٌ لاَ نَرَى القَتْلَ سُبَّةً ... وَلاَ تَنْثَنِي عِنْدَ الرِّمَاحِ الْمَدَاعِسِ
> وَإِنَّا لَنَقْرِي الضَّيْفَ مِنْ قَمَعِ الذُّرَا ... وَنَضْرِبُ رَأْسَ الأَبْلَغِ الْمُتَشَاوِسِ
> تَرُدُّ كُمَاةَ الْمُعْلِمِيْنَ إِذَا انْتَخَوْا ... بِضَرْبٍ يُسَلِّي نَخْوَةَ الْمُتَقَاعِسِ
> بِكُلِّ فَتًى حَامِي الْحَقِيْقَةِ مَاجِدٍ ... كَرِيْمٍ كَسِرْحَانِ الْغَضَاةِ مُخَالِسٍ
> يَذُودُونَ عَنْ أَحْسَابِهِمْ وَتِلاَدِهِمْ ... بِبِيْضٍ تَقُدُّ الْهَامَ تَحْتَ الْقَوَانِسِ
> فَسَائِلْ بَنِي بَدْرٍ إِذَا مَا لَقِيْتَهُمْ ... بِمَا فَعَلَ الْإِخْوَانُ يَوْمَ التَّمَارُسِ
> إِذَا مَا خَرَجْتُمْ فَاصْدُقُوا مَنْ لَقِيْتُمُ ... وَلاَ تَكْتُمُوا أَخْبَارَكُمْ فِي الْمَجَالِسِ
> وَقُولُوا زَلَلْنَا عَنْ مَخَالِبِ خَادِرٍ ... بِهِ وَحَرٌ فِي الصَّدْرِ مَا لَمْ يُمَارِسِ

"Do the sons of the foundling woman suppose that we, upon horseback, are not their equals among the horsemen? We are a people who do not count death in battle a disgrace, and who do not bend before the thrusting spears. We give the guest to eat from the choicest humps, and we strike the head of the loud-tongued man who looks askance. Our blows turn back the champions who bear their marks when they grow proud, with a stroke that cures the arrogance of the laggard, dealt by every youth who guards the truth, glorious, noble, like the wolf of the thicket seizing his chance. They defend their honors and their inherited wealth with white blades that split skulls beneath the helmet crests. So ask Banu Badr, when you meet them, what the brothers did on the day of the trial of strength. When you go out, tell the truth to whomever you meet, and do not hide your tidings in the assemblies. Say: we slipped away from the claws of a lion in his lair, who bears in his breast a rancor so long as he is not provoked."

Then came the campaign against Banu al-Mustaliq at al-Muraysi'. The Messenger of Allah remained in Madinah through part of Jumada al-Akhirah and through Rajab, and then made his campaign against Banu al-Mustaliq of Khuza'ah in Sha'ban of the sixth year of the Hijrah. Word had reached him that they were gathering to make war upon him, their leader being al-Harith ibn Abi Dirar, the father of Juwayriyah bint al-Harith, wife of the Messenger of Allah. When he heard of them, he went out from Madinah against them and met them at a watering place of theirs called al-Muraysi', on the side of Qudayd toward the coast. They came together there and fought.

The watchword of the Muslims on the day of Banu al-Mustaliq was:

> «يَا مَنْصُورُ؛ أَمِتْ أَمِتْ»

"O Mansur, slay, slay!"

'Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) charged upon them and broke up their gathering, killing Malik and his son, who were among their chiefs. The Muslims pursued them and killed those they killed, and the Messenger of Allah took many of them captive and divided them among the Muslims.

Juwayriyah bint al-Harith ibn Abi Dirar, wife of the Messenger of Allah, was among the captives, and she fell by lot to Thabit ibn al-Shammas, or to a cousin of his. She contracted for her own freedom and sought the help of the Messenger of Allah, and when she had discharged her contract, the Messenger of Allah married her. The news went out among the people that the Messenger of Allah had married her, and the people said: "They are the in-laws of the Messenger of Allah," and they released what captives they held. The narrators mention that a hundred households of the captives of Banu al-Mustaliq were set free because of her; and so she was the most blessed of women for her own people.

On the day of Banu al-Mustaliq a Muslim man of Banu Kalb ibn 'Awf ibn 'Amir ibn Layth ibn Bakr, called Hisham ibn Sababah, was killed. A man of the Ansar, of the clan of 'Ubadah ibn al-Samit, struck him while taking him for a polytheist, and killed him in error.
