# The Treaty at Hudaybiyah

Then came the 'Umrah of al-Hudaybiyah, عُمرة الحُدَيبية.

The Messenger of Allah remained in Madinah through the months of Ramadan and Shawwal, then set out in Dhu al-Qi'dah intending 'Umrah and not war. He called upon the Arabs around him and upon the bedouin to march with him, but many of them held back. He went forward with those who were with him from the Muhajireen and the Ansar and those Arabs who had joined him. He drove the sacrificial animals before him and entered the state of ihram for 'Umrah, so that the people would know that he had come only as a visitor to the Sacred House, honoring it. The sacrificial animals he drove numbered seventy head.

Jabir ibn 'Abdullah al-Ansari used to say:

«كُنَّا أصحاب الْحُدَيْبِيَّة أربع عشرة مئة»

"We, the companions of al-Hudaybiyah, were fourteen hundred."

His ihram was assumed at Dhu al-Hulayfah. He entered the state of consecration and his companions entered it with him, and they garlanded the sacrificial animals and marked them.

When he reached 'Usfan he was met by Bishr ibn Sufyan al-Ka'bi, whose name is also given as Busr, who said:

«يا رسول الله هذه قُرَيْش؛ قد سمعت بمسيرك، فخرجوا معهم العُوذُ الْمَطَافِيْلُ قد لَبِسُوا جُلود النُّمور، وقد نزلوا بذي طَوَى يعاهدون الله لا تَدْخُلُها عليهم أبداً، وهذا خالد بن الوَلِيد في خيلهم قد قَدَّموها إلى كُراعِ الغَمِيم»

"O Messenger of Allah, this is Quraysh. They have heard of your march and have come out with their milk-camels and their young, having clothed themselves in the skins of leopards. They have encamped at Dhu Tuwa, swearing a covenant with Allah that you shall never enter upon them. And here is Khalid ibn al-Walid at the head of their cavalry, which they have pushed forward to Kura' al-Ghamim."

The Messenger of Allah said:

«يَا وَيْحَ قُرَيْشٍ لَقَدْ أَكَلَتْهُمْ الْحَرْبُ، ماذا عَلَيْهِمْ لَوْ خَلَّوْا بَيْنِي وَبَيْنَ سَائِرِ العَرَبِ، فَإِنْ هُمْ أَصابُونِي كَانَ الَّذِي أَرَادُوا، وَإِنْ أَظْهَرَنِيَ اللهُ عَلَيْهِمْ دَخَلُوا فِي الإِسْلاَمِ وَافِرِيْنَ، وَإِنْ لَمْ يَفْعَلُوا قَاتَلُوا وَبِهِمْ قُرَّةٌ، فَمَا تَظُنُّ قُرَيْشٌ؟ فَوَاللهِ لاَ أَزَالُ أُجَاهِدُ عَلَى الَّذِي بَعَثَنِي اللهُ بِهِ حَتَّى يُظْهِرَهُ اللهُ ـ تعالى ـ أَوْ تَنْفَرِدَ هَذِهِ السَّالِفَةُ»

"Woe to Quraysh, war has consumed them. What would it cost them to leave me to the rest of the Arabs? If they strike me down, that is what they sought; and if Allah gives me victory over them, they will enter Islam in great numbers. And if they do not, they will fight while strength is still in them. What do Quraysh think? By Allah, I shall not cease to strive for that with which Allah sent me until He, the Exalted, makes it prevail, or this neck is severed."

He pointed to the front of his neck as he said it. Then he said:

«مَنْ يَخْرُجُ بِنا عَلَى طَرِيْقٍ غَيْرِ طَرِيْقِهِمْ الَّتِي هُمْ بِها؟»

"Who will bring us out by a road other than the road they are upon?"

A man of Aslam said: "I will, O Messenger of Allah." He led them along a rough road between mountain passes. When the Messenger of Allah reached the pass of al-Murar, the descent toward al-Hudaybiyah, his she-camel knelt and would not rise. They said: "She is balked, O Messenger of Allah," the word for the stubborn refusal of camels. He said:

«مَا خَلَأَتْ وَمَا هُوَ لَها بِخُلُقٍ، وَلَكِنْ حَبَسَها حَابِسُ الفِيلِ عَنْ مَكَّةَ، لاَ تَدْعُونِي قُرَيْشٌ اليَوْمَ إِلَى خُطَّةٍ يَسْأَلُونَنِي فِيهَا صِلَةَ الرَّحِمِ إِلاَّ أَعْطَيْتُهُمْ إِيَّاهَا»

"She is not balked, nor is that in her nature. What has restrained her is the One who restrained the Elephant from Mecca. Quraysh shall not call me today to any plan in which they ask of me the ties of kinship without my granting it to them."

Then he said to them: «انْزِلُوا» "Dismount." They said: "O Messenger of Allah, there is no water in the valley on which we may camp." He drew an arrow from his quiver and gave it to one of his companions, said to be the Commander of the Faithful, who went down with it into one of those wells and thrust it into the bed of it, and the water welled up. The people drank and drew water.

Envoys passed back and forth between the Messenger of Allah and Quraysh. Quraysh sent 'Urwah ibn Mas'ud al-Thaqafi, who spoke with the Messenger of Allah and was told that he had not come for war, but only to honor the Sacred House. 'Urwah returned to Quraysh having seen how the companions of the Messenger of Allah revered him: he did not perform ablution but they hastened to the water he had used, nor did he spit but they hastened to it, nor did a hair fall from him but they took it. He went back to Quraysh and said:

«يا مَعْشَرَ قُرَيْشٍ؛ إِنِّي قد رأيت كِسْرَى فِي مُلْكِهِ، وَقَيْصَرَ في ملكه، والنَّجَاشِيَّ في مُلْكِهِ، وإِنِّي والله ما رأيتُ ملكاً في قوم قطّ مِثْلَ محمَّدٍ في أصحابه، ولقد رأيتُ قوماً لا يُسْلِمونه لشيءٍ أبداً فَرَوْا رأيكم»

"O assembly of Quraysh, I have seen Khosrow in his kingdom, and Caesar in his kingdom, and the Negus in his kingdom, and by Allah I have never seen a king among a people as Muhammad is among his companions. I have seen a people who will never surrender him for anything at all. So look to your own judgment."

Quraysh then ordered fifty of their men to circle the camp of the Messenger of Allah in order to seize an unguarded moment. They were themselves taken captive and brought before him, and he pardoned them and set them free, though they had shot arrows and hurled stones into his camp. The Messenger of Allah sent envoys to Quraysh, and Quraysh detained them and meant them harm.

Word reached the Messenger of Allah that his envoys had been killed, and his companions gave him their pledge, the Pledge of al-Ridwan. The people used to say that he took their pledge unto death. But Jabir ibn 'Abdullah used to say:

«إنّ رسول الله لم يُبايعنا على الموت، إنَّما بايعنا على أنْ لا نَفِرَّ»

"The Messenger of Allah did not take our pledge unto death; he took our pledge only that we would not flee."

The envoys sent to Quraysh returned, and Suhayl ibn 'Amr, of Banu 'Amir ibn Lu'ayy, came out to him. When the Messenger of Allah saw him approaching he said: "The people want peace." He and Suhayl spoke at length, and the settlement was reached, and nothing remained but the writing of it. At that point 'Umar ibn al-Khattab rose in objection to the Messenger of Allah, doubting in Islam, and said: "O Messenger of Allah, are you not the Messenger of Allah?" He said: «بَلَى» "Yes." He said: "Are we not the Muslims?" He said: «بَلَى» "Yes." He said: "Are they not the polytheists?" He said: «بَلَى» "Yes." He said: "Then why do we give of ourselves this abasement?" The Messenger of Allah said:

«أَنَا عَبْدُ اللهِ وَرَسُولُهُ، وَلَنْ أُخَالِفَ أَمْرَهُ، وَلَنْ يُضَيِّعَنِي»

"I am the servant of Allah and His Messenger. I shall not disobey His command, and He will not forsake me."

The Messenger of Allah then called 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) and said: «اكْتُبْ: بسم الله الرَّحْمنِ الرَّحيم» "Write: In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful." Suhayl said: "I do not recognize this. Write rather: In Your name, O God." The Messenger of Allah said: «اكْتُبْ: باسْمِكَ اللَّهُمَّ» "Write: In Your name, O God." So he wrote it. Then he said: «اكْتُبْ: هَذَا مَا صَالَحَ عَلَيْهِ مُحَمَّدٌ رَسُولُ اللهِ سُهَيْلَ بْنَ عَمْرٍو» "Write: This is what Muhammad, the Messenger of Allah, has agreed upon with Suhayl ibn 'Amr." Suhayl said: "Had I borne witness that you are the Messenger of Allah I would not have fought you. Write your name and the name of your father." So he said to 'Ali (ع): «اكْتُبْ: هَذَا مَا صَالَحَ عَلَيْهِ مُحَمَّدُ ابْنُ عَبْدِ اللهِ» "Write: This is what Muhammad ibn 'Abdullah has agreed upon." The Commander of the Faithful said: "O Messenger of Allah, I will not erase your name." He said:

«اكْتُبْ؛ فَإِنَّكَ تُدْعَى إِلَى مِثْلِهَا»

"Write, for you will be called to the like of it."

That came to pass in the days of Mu'awiyah.

'Ali (ع) wrote, at the dictation of the Messenger of Allah:

«بِاسْمِكَ اللَّهُمَّ؛ هَذَا مَا صَالَحَ عَلَيْهِ مُحَمَّدُ بْنُ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ سُهَيْلَ بْنَ عَمْرٍو، اصْطَلَحَا عَلَى وَضْعِ الْحَرْبِ عَنْ النَّاسِ عَشْرَ سِنِينَ يَأْمَنُ فِيهِنَّ النَّاسُ وَيَكُفُّ بَعْضُهُمْ عَنْ بَعْضٍ عَلَى أَنَّهُ مَنْ أَتَى مُحَمَّدًا مِنْ قُرَيْشٍ بِغَيْرِ إِذْنِ وَلِيِّهِ رَدَّهُ عَلَيْهِمْ. وَمَنْ جَاءَ قُرَيْشاً مِمَّنْ مَعَ مُحمَّدٍ لَمْ يَرُدُّوهُ عَلَيْهِ، وَأَنَّ بَيْنَنَا عَيْبَةً مَكْفُوفَةً، وَأَنَّهُ لا إِسْلاَلَ وَلا إِغْلاَلَ، وَأَنَّهُ مَنْ أَحَبَّ أَنْ يَدْخُلَ فِي عَقْدِ مُحَمَّدٍ وَعَهْدِهِ دَخَلَ فِيِهِ، وَمَنْ أَحَبَّ أَنْ يَدْخُلَ فِي عَقْدِ قُرَيْشٍ وَعَهْدِهِمْ دَخَلَ فِيهِ»

"In Your name, O God. This is what Muhammad ibn 'Abdullah has agreed upon with Suhayl ibn 'Amr. They have agreed to lay down war between the people for ten years, during which the people shall be secure and shall hold back from one another, on the condition that whoever comes to Muhammad from Quraysh without the permission of his guardian shall be returned to them, and whoever comes to Quraysh from those with Muhammad shall not be returned to him; and that between us is a sealed vessel of trust; and that there shall be no theft and no treachery; and that whoever wishes to enter into the compact and covenant of Muhammad may enter into it, and whoever wishes to enter into the compact and covenant of Quraysh may enter into it."

Khuza'ah leapt forward and said: «نحن في عَقْدِ محمَّدٍ وعَهْدِهِ» "We are in the compact and covenant of Muhammad." And Banu Bakr leapt forward and said: «نحن في عَقْدِ قُرَيْشٍ وَعَهْدِهِمْ» "We are in the compact and covenant of Quraysh." It was further stipulated that he should turn back from them that year and not enter Mecca upon them, and that when the following year came they would withdraw from him and he would enter it with his companions and remain there three days, carrying with him only the weapons of a rider, swords in their sheaths, and entering with nothing besides.

While the Messenger of Allah and Suhayl ibn 'Amr were writing the document, Abu Jandal ibn Suhayl ibn 'Amr came dragging himself in his fetters. He had accepted Islam, and his father Suhayl had done this to him on account of his Islam, and he had escaped to the Messenger of Allah. His father said to the Messenger of Allah: "Was the matter not concluded between me and you before this one came?" He said: «بَلَى» "Yes." Suhayl rose and seized him by the collar and began to drag him back to Quraysh, and his son Abu Jandal cried out at the top of his voice:

«يا معشر المسلمين أَتُرَدُّ إلى المشركين يفتنوني عن الدِّين؟»

"O assembly of Muslims, am I to be returned to the polytheists, that they may persecute me out of my religion?"

The Muslims were nearly destroyed by grief at it. The Messenger of Allah said:

«يَا أَبَا جَنْدَلِ اصْبِرْ وَاحْتَسِبْ، فَإِنَّ اللهَ جَاعِلٌ لَكَ وَلِمَنْ مَعَكَ مِنْ الْمُسْتَضْعَفِيْنَ فَرَجًا وَمَخْرَجًا، إِنَّا قَدْ عَقَدْنَا بَيْنَنَا وَبَيْنَ الْقَوْمِ صُلْحًا، وَأَعْطَيْنَاهُمْ عَلَى ذَلِكَ وَأَعْطَوْنَا عَهْدَ اللهِ، وَإِنَّا لاَ نَغْدِرُ بِهِمْ»

"O Abu Jandal, be patient and seek the reward of it, for Allah will make for you and for those with you among the oppressed a relief and a way out. We have concluded a peace between ourselves and these people, and we have given them upon that the covenant of Allah and they have given it to us, and we do not act treacherously toward them."

When he had finished the document he called men of the Muslims and men of the polytheists to witness the settlement.

Then the Messenger of Allah rose to his sacrificial animals and slaughtered them, then sat and shaved his head. When the Muslims saw that he had slaughtered and shaved, they hastened to slaughter and to shave, and some of them cut their hair short. The Messenger of Allah said: «يَرْحَمُ اللهُ الْمُحَلِّقِيْنَ» "May Allah have mercy on those who shave." They said: "And on those who cut short, O Messenger of Allah?" He said: «يَرْحَمُ اللهُ الْمُحَلِّقِيْنَ» "May Allah have mercy on those who shave." They said: "And on those who cut short, O Messenger of Allah?" And on the third time he said:

«يَرْحَمُ اللهُ الْمُحَلِّقِيْنَ وَالْمُقَصِّرِيْنَ»

"May Allah have mercy on those who shave and on those who cut short."

The Messenger of Allah turned back homeward, and when he was between Mecca and Madinah Surat al-Fath was revealed to him.

When he arrived in Madinah, Abu Basir, whose name was 'Utbah ibn Usayd ibn Jariyah, came to him, being one of those who had been held back in Mecca. A man of the polytheists came to the Messenger of Allah with a letter from them saying: "Did we not make a covenant with you that no one who is with us should come to you?" He said: "Yes." And the Messenger of Allah said:

«يَا أَبَا بَصِيْرِ إِنَّا قَدْ أَعْطَيْنَا هَؤُلاَءِ الْقَوْمَ مَا قَدْ عَلِمْتَ وَلاَ يَصْلُحُ لَنَا فِي دِيْنِنَا الْغَدْرُ وَإِنَّ اللَّهَ جَاعِلٌ لَكَ وَلِمَنْ مَعَكَ مِنْ الْمُسْتَضْعَفِينَ فَرَجًا وَمَخْرَجًا، فَانْطَلِقْ إِلَى قَوْمِكَ»

"O Abu Basir, we have given these people what you know of, and treachery does not befit us in our religion. Allah will make for you and for those with you among the oppressed a relief and a way out. So go back to your people."

Abu Basir went back with the polytheist, and when they were at Dhu al-Hulayfah he fell upon him and killed him. He then journeyed on until he encamped at al-'Is, in the region of Dhu al-Marwah on the seacoast, upon the road of Quraysh by which they used to travel to Syria. Word of what the Messenger of Allah had said of Abu Basir reached the Muslims who had been held back in Mecca:

«وَيْلُ أُمِّهِ مِحَشُّ حَرْبٍ لَوْ كَانَ مَعَهُ رِجَالٌ!»

"Woe to his mother, what a kindler of war he is, if only he had men with him!"

So they went out from Mecca to Abu Basir at al-'Is, and there gathered to him nearly seventy men. They pressed Quraysh hard, killing whomever of them they overcame and cutting off every caravan that passed by them, until Quraysh wrote to the Messenger of Allah entreating him by their ties of kinship to take them in, saying they had no further need of them. So the Messenger of Allah took them in, and they came to him in Madinah. Abu Basir was of Thaqif.

In that same period Umm Kulthum bint 'Uqbah ibn Abi Mu'ayt emigrated to the Messenger of Allah, and her two brothers 'Umarah and al-Walid, sons of 'Uqbah, came seeking her return. Then Allah, Mighty and Majestic, revealed to His Messenger:

﴿يَا أَيُّهَا الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا إِذَا جَاءَكُمُ الْمُؤْمِنَاتُ مُهَاجِرَاتٍ فَامْتَحِنُوهُنَّ اللهُ أَعْلَمُ بِإِيمَانِهِنَّ فَإِنْ عَلِمْتُمُوهُنَّ مُؤْمِنَاتٍ فَلاَ تَرْجِعُوهُنَّ إِلَى الْكُفَّارِ لاَ هُنَّ حِلٌّ لَّهُمْ وَلاَ هُمْ يَحِلُّونَ لَهُنَّ وَآتُوهُم مَّا أَنْفَقُوا وَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْكُمْ أَن تَنكِحُوهُنَّ إِذَا آتَيْتُمُوهُنَّ أُجُورَهُنَّ وَلاَ تُمْسِكُوا بِعِصَمِ الْكَوَافِرِ﴾ [الممتحنة: ١٠]

"O you who believe, when believing women come to you as emigrants, examine them. Allah knows best concerning their faith. If you find them to be believers, do not return them to the disbelievers. They are not lawful for them, nor are they lawful for the women. Give the disbelievers what they have spent, and there is no blame upon you if you marry them when you have given them their bridal gifts. And do not hold to the marriage bonds of disbelieving women."

So Allah, the Exalted, refused that they should be returned to the disbelievers.
