# The Gate of Khaybar

After returning from al-Ḥudaybiyyah, the Messenger of Allah remained in Medina through Dhū al-Ḥijjah and part of Muḥarram, and in that year the polytheists held custody of the pilgrimage. Then, in the remaining days of Muḥarram of the seventh year, he set out for Khaybar with the Muhājirūn, the Anṣār, and those who followed them. He handed the banner to ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib (ع), and it was white.

Ibn al-Akwaʿ went out ahead of the Messenger of Allah chanting rajaz:

> وَاللهِ لَوْلاَ اللهُ مَا اهْتَدَيْنَا
> وَلاَ تَصَدَّقْنَا وَلاَ صَلَّيْنَا
> إِنَّا إِذاً قَوْمٌ بَغَوْا عَلَيْنَا
> وَإِنْ أَرَادُوا فِتْنَةً أَبَيْنَا
> فَأَنْزِلَنْ سَكِينَةً عَلَيْنَا
> وَثَبِّتِ الأَقْدَامَ إِنْ لاَقَيْنَا

"By Allah, had it not been for Allah we would not have been guided, nor given charity, nor prayed. Were it so, they would be a people who wronged us; and if they desire strife, we refuse it. So send down upon us tranquility, and make firm our feet if we meet them."

The Messenger of Allah said:

> "يَرْحَمُكَ اللهُ"

"May Allah have mercy on you."

He was killed on the day of Khaybar as a martyr. While he was fighting, his own sword glanced back upon him and wounded him severely, and of that wound he died. The Muslims fell into doubt concerning him and said that his own weapon had killed him, until the Messenger of Allah declared:

> "إِنَّهُ لَشَهِيدٌ"

"He is indeed a martyr."

Then the Muslims prayed over him.

When the Messenger of Allah came within sight of Khaybar he said to his companions, "قِفُوا" ("Halt"), and then he said:

> "اللَّهُمَّ رَبَّ السَّمَوَاتِ وَمَا أَظْلَلْنَ وَرَبَّ الأَرَضِينَ وَمَا أَقْلَلْنَ وَرَبَّ الشَّيَاطِينِ وَمَا أَضْلَلْنَ وَرَبَّ الرِّيَاحِ وَمَا أَذْرَيْنَ، فَإِنَّا نَسْأَلُكَ خَيْرَ هَذِهِ الْقَرْيَةِ وَخَيْرَ أَهْلِهَا وَخَيْرَ مَا فِيهَا، وَنَعُوذُ بِكَ مِنْ شَرِّهَا وَشَرِّ أَهْلِهَا وَشَرِّ مَا فِيهَا، أَقْدِمُوا بِسْمِ اللهِ"

"O Allah, Lord of the heavens and all that they shade, Lord of the earths and all that they carry, Lord of the devils and all that they lead astray, Lord of the winds and all that they scatter: we ask You for the good of this settlement, the good of its people, and the good of what is in it; and we seek refuge in You from its evil, the evil of its people, and the evil of what is in it. Advance, in the name of Allah."

This he would say of every settlement he entered.

He descended upon Khaybar by night and passed the night there. When morning came he mounted, and the Muslims mounted with him. The people of Khaybar came out toward them with their spades and their baskets, and when they saw the Messenger of Allah they cried out that this was Muhammad and the army with him, and they turned and fled. The Messenger of Allah said:

> "اللهُ أَكْبَرُ خَرِبَتْ خَيْبَرُ، إِنَّا إِذَا نَزَلْنَا بِسَاحَةِ قَوْمٍ فَسَاءَ صَبَاحُ الْمُنْذَرِينَ"

"Allah is greatest. Khaybar is ruined. When we descend into the courtyard of a people, evil is the morning of those who were warned."

On leaving Medina for this expedition he had taken the road by ʿIṣr, where a mosque was built for him, and then by al-Ṣahbāʾ. He advanced with his army until he halted in a valley called al-Rajīʿ, between the people of Khaybar and Ghaṭafān, to stand between them and any reinforcement Ghaṭafān might send.

The Messenger of Allah gave the banner, which was white, to Abū Bakr, to fight the people of Khaybar. He returned defeated, and there was no conquest. In the morning he sent ʿUmar ibn al-Khaṭṭāb with the banner, and he too returned defeated, and there was no conquest. Then the Messenger of Allah said:

> "لأُعْطِيَنَّ الرَّايَةَ غَداً رَجُلاً يُحِبُّ اللهَ وَرَسُولَهُ، وَيُحِبُّهُ اللهُ وَرَسُولُهُ، كَرَّارٌ غَيْرُ فَرَّارٍ، يَفْتَحُ اللهُ عَلَى يَدَيْهِ"

"Tomorrow I shall give the banner to a man who loves Allah and His Messenger, and whom Allah and His Messenger love, one who charges and does not flee. Allah will grant victory at his hands."

Every man among them looked to it with longing. When morning came the Messenger of Allah said, "أَيْنَ أَخِي عَلِيُّ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ؟" ("Where is my brother ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib?"). It was said that he was suffering in his eyes. So he called for him and spat into his eyes and said:

> "اللَّهُمَّ اذْهِبْ عَنْهُ الْحَرَّ وَالْبَرْدَ"

"O Allah, take from him the heat and the cold."

Thereafter neither heat nor cold ever troubled him (ع). And he gave him the banner and said:

> "خُذْهَا وَامْضِ بِهَا حَتَّى يَفْتَحَ اللهُ عَلَى يَدَيْكَ"

"Take it and go forward with it until Allah grants victory at your hands."

He went out swiftly, the Muslims behind him, until he planted his banner in a heap of stones beneath the fortress. A Jew looked down upon him from the top of the fortress and said to him, "مَنْ أَنْتَ؟" ("Who are you?"). He answered that he was ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib. The Jew said:

> "عَلَوْتُمْ، وَمَا أُنْزِلَ عَلَى مُوسَى بْنِ عِمْرَانَ"

"You have prevailed, by what was revealed to Moses son of ʿImrān."

And he did not return until Allah granted victory at his hands.

Marḥab the Jew came out to him from their fortress, having gathered his whole armament upon himself, chanting:

> قَدْ عَلِمَتْ خَيْبَرُ أَنِّي مَرْحَبُ
> شَاكِي السِّلاَحِ بَطَلٌ مُجَرَّبُ
> أَطْعُنُ أَحْيَاناً وَحِيناً أَضْرِبُ
> إِذَا اللُّيُوثُ أَقْبَلَتْ تَحَرَّبُ
> إِنَّ حِمَايَ لِلْحِمَى لاَ يُقْرَبُ

"Khaybar knows well that I am Marḥab, armed to the teeth, a tried champion. Sometimes I thrust and sometimes I strike, when the lions come on in fury. My protected ground is not approached."

ʿAlī (ع) answered him, saying:

> أَنَا الَّذِي سَمَّتْنِي أُمِّي حَيْدَرَهْ
> أَكِيلُكُمْ بِالسَّيْفِ كَيْلَ السَّنْدَرَهْ

"I am the one whose mother named him Ḥaydara. I shall mete out to you with the sword the measure of the sandara."

They circled and charged at one another a long while, and Marḥab bore down upon the Commander of the Faithful and struck him upon his shield and drove it from him. So ʿAlī (ع) took hold of a door that stood beside the fortress and shielded himself with it, and charged upon Marḥab and struck him, splitting his skull through the helmet, and he fell dead.

That door remained in his hands, and he went on fighting with it until he had killed a company of the champions of the Jews, and Allah granted victory at his hands. Then he cast the door from his hands, and afterward eight men gathered, and it is said more than eight, to turn that door over, and they were not able to.

Among what is transmitted from ʿAlī (ع) is that he said:

> "لَمَّا غَزَا رَسُولُ اللهِ - صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَى آلِهِ - خَيْبَرَ تَلَقَّانَا أَهْلُهَا مِنَ الْيَهُودِ بِمِثْلِ الْجِبَالِ مِنَ الْخَيْلِ وَالسِّلاَحِ، وَهُمْ أَمْنَعُ دَاراً، وَأَكْثَرُهَا عَدَداً، كُلٌّ يُنَادِي لِلْبِرَازِ إِلَى اللِّقَاءِ، فَلَمْ يَبْرُزْ إِلَيْهِمْ أَحَدٌ مِنَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ إِلاَّ قَتَلُوهُ، حَتَّى احْمَرَّتِ الْحَدَقُ، وَدُعِيتُ لِلْبِرَازِ، وَهَمَّتْ كُلَّ امْرِئٍ نَفْسُهُ، فَأَنْهَضَنِي رَسُولُ اللهِ - صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَى آلِهِ - إِلَى بِرَازِهِمْ، فَلَمْ يَبْرُزْ إِلَيَّ أَحَدٌ مِنْهُمْ إِلاَّ قَتَلْتُهُ، وَلَمْ يَثْبُتْ لِي مِنْهُمْ فَارِسٌ إِلاَّ طَعَنْتُهُ، ثُمَّ شَدَدْتُ عَلَيْهِمْ شَدَّةَ اللَّيْثِ عَلَى فَرِيسَتِهِ، فَأَدْخَلْتُهُمْ جَوْفَ مَدِينَتِهِمْ يَكْسَعُ بَعْضُهُمْ بَعْضاً. وَوَرَدْتُ بَابَ الْمَدِينَةِ، فَوَجَدْتُهُ مَسْدُوداً عَلَيْهِمْ، فَاقْتَلَعْتُهُ بِيَدِي، وَدَخَلْتُ عَلَيْهِمْ مَدِينَتَهُمْ وَحْدِي، أَقْتُلُ مَنْ يَظْهَرُ لِي مِنْ رِجَالِهَا، وَأَسْبِي مَنْ أَجِدُ فِيهَا مِنْ نِسَائِهَا، فَافْتَتَحْتُهَا وَحْدِي، لَمْ يَكُنْ لِي مِنْ مُعِينٍ إِلاَّ اللهُ وَحْدَهُ"

"When the Messenger of Allah made war upon Khaybar, its people among the Jews met us with horses and weapons like mountains. Theirs was the most impregnable dwelling and the most numerous people, every one of them calling out for single combat, and no Muslim came out against them but they killed him, until eyes reddened. I was called out to single combat, and every man was preoccupied with himself. The Messenger of Allah raised me up to meet them, and none of them came out against me but I killed him, and no horseman of theirs stood firm against me but I ran him through. Then I bore down upon them with the ferocity of a lion upon its prey, and drove them into the belly of their city, one thrusting the other along. I came to the gate of the city and found it barred against them, and I tore it out with my hand, and entered their city alone, killing whichever of its men appeared before me and taking captive whichever of its women I found in it. So I opened it alone, and I had no helper but Allah alone."

From Ismāʿīl ibn Muhammad al-Kūfī, with his chain, from Jābir ibn ʿAbd Allah al-Anṣārī, who said that when ʿAlī (ع) came to the Messenger of Allah with the conquest of Khaybar, the Messenger of Allah said to him (ع):

> "لَوْلاَ أَنْ تَقُولَ فِيكَ طَائِفَةٌ مِنْ أُمَّتِي مَا قَالَتِ النَّصَارَى فِي الْمَسِيحِ، لَقُلْتُ فِيكَ الْيَوْمَ قَوْلاً، لاَ تَمُرُّ بِمَلأٍ مِنَ النَّاسِ إِلاَّ أَخَذُوا مِنْ تُرَابِ تَحْتِ رِجْلَيْكَ، وَمِنْ فَضْلِ طَهُورِكَ، يَسْتَشْفُونَ بِهِمَا. وَلَكِنْ حَسْبُكَ بِأَنْ تَكُونَ مِنِّي بِمَنْزِلَةِ هَارُونَ مِنْ مُوسَى إِلاَّ أَنَّهُ لاَ نَبِيَّ بَعْدِي. وَإِنَّكَ لَتُبْرِئُ ذِمَّتِي، وَتُقَاتِلُ عَلَى سُنَّتِي، وَإِنَّكَ فِي الآخِرَةِ غَداً مَعِي أَقْرَبُ النَّاسِ مِنِّي، وَإِنَّكَ غَداً عَلَى الْحَوْضِ خَلِيفَتِي، وَإِنَّكَ أَوَّلُ مَنْ يَرِدُ عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضَ لأَنَّكَ أَوَّلُ مَنْ آمَنَ بِي، وَإِنَّكَ أَوَّلُ مَنْ يُكْسَى مَعِي، وَإِنَّكَ أَوَّلُ مَنْ يَدْخُلُ الْجَنَّةَ مِنْ أُمَّتِي. وَإِنَّ شِيعَتَكَ عَلَى مَنَابِرَ مِنْ نُورٍ مُبْيَضَّةً وُجُوهُهُمْ حَوْلِي، أَشْفَعُ لَهُمْ حَتَّى يَكُونُوا فِي الْجَنَّةِ جِيرَانِي. وَإِنَّ حَرْبَكَ حَرْبِي وَإِنَّ سِلْمَكَ سِلْمِي، وَإِنَّ سَرِيرَةَ صَدْرِكَ كَسَرِيرَةِ صَدْرِي، وَإِنَّ وَلَدَكَ وَلَدِي، وَإِنَّكَ تُنْجِزُ عِدَاتِي، وَإِنَّ الْحَقَّ عَلَى لِسَانِكَ وَفِي قَلْبِكَ وَبَيْنَ يَدَيْكَ وَنُصْبِ عَيْنَيْكَ، وَإِنَّ الإِيمَانَ مُخَالِطٌ لَحْمَكَ وَدَمَكَ كَمَا خَالَطَ لَحْمِي وَدَمِي، وَإِنَّهُ لَنْ يَرِدَ عَلَيَّ الْحَوْضَ مُبْغِضٌ لَكَ، وَلَنْ يَغِيبَ عَنْهُ مُحِبٌّ لَكَ حَتَّى تَرَاهُ مَعَكَ"

"Were it not that a party of my community would say of you what the Christians said of the Messiah, I would say of you today a word such that you would not pass by a gathering of people without their taking of the dust beneath your feet and of the water left from your purification, seeking healing by them both. But it is enough for you that you are to me as Aaron was to Moses, except that there is no prophet after me. You discharge my obligation, and you fight upon my sunnah, and in the Hereafter tomorrow you will be with me, the nearest of people to me, and tomorrow at the Pool you are my deputy, and you are the first to come to me at the Pool because you are the first who believed in me, and you are the first to be clothed with me, and you are the first of my community to enter Paradise. Your Shīʿa will be upon pulpits of light, their faces shining, around me; I shall intercede for them until they are my neighbors in Paradise. Your war is my war and your peace is my peace, and the secret of your breast is as the secret of my breast, and your child is my child. You fulfill my promises. The truth is upon your tongue and in your heart and before your hands and before your eyes, and faith is mingled with your flesh and your blood as it is mingled with my flesh and my blood. No one who hates you will come to me at the Pool, and no one who loves you will be absent from it until he sees you with him."

Thereupon ʿAlī (ع) fell down in prostration and said:

> "الْحَمْدُ للهِ الَّذِي أَنْعَمَ عَلَيَّ بِالإِسْلاَمِ، وَعَلَّمَنِي الْقُرْآنَ، وَحَبَّبَنِي إِلَى خَيْرِ الْبَرِيَّةِ، وَخَاتَمِ النَّبِيِّينَ، وَسَيِّدِ الْمُرْسَلِينَ، وَصَفْوَةِ اللهِ فِي جَمِيعِ الْعَالَمِينَ، إِحْسَاناً مِنْهُ إِلَيَّ، وَتَفَضُّلاً مِنْهُ عَلَيَّ"

"Praise be to Allah, who favored me with Islam, and taught me the Qurʾān, and made me beloved to the best of creation, the Seal of the Prophets, the master of the Messengers, and Allah's chosen one among all the worlds, as a kindness from Him to me and a bounty from Him upon me."

And the Messenger of Allah said to him:

> "لَوْلاَكَ يَا عَلِيُّ مَا عُرِفَ الْمُؤْمِنُ مِنْ بَعْدِي"

"Were it not for you, ʿAlī, the believer would not be known after me."

So the Messenger of Allah conquered Khaybar and took its fortresses, and killed of the men whom he willed and granted safety to whom he willed, and took captives of their offspring, and chose for himself Ṣafiyyah bint Ḥuyayy ibn Akhṭab.

On the day of Khaybar the Messenger of Allah forbade four things: approaching pregnant women among the captives, eating the flesh of the domestic donkey, eating every beast of prey possessing a fang, and selling the spoils before they are divided.

From Jābir ibn ʿAbd Allah (رض): when the Prophet forbade the people the flesh of donkeys, he permitted them the flesh of horses.

The Messenger of Allah delivered a sermon at Khaybar, and in his sermon he said:

> "لاَ يَحِلُّ لِامْرِئٍ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ أَنْ يَسْقِيَ مَاءَهُ زَرْعَ غَيْرِهِ - يَعْنِي إِتْيَانَ الْحَبَالَى مِنَ السَّبَايَا - وَلاَ يَحِلُّ لِامْرِئٍ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ أَنْ يُصِيبَ امْرَأَةً مِنَ السَّبْيِ حَتَّى يَسْتَبْرِئَهَا، وَلاَ يَحِلُّ لِامْرِئٍ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ أَنْ يَبِيعَ مَغْنَماً حَتَّى يُقْسَمَ، وَلاَ يَحِلُّ لِامْرِئٍ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ أَنْ يَرْكَبَ دَابَّةً مِنْ فَيْءِ الْمُسْلِمِينَ حَتَّى إِذَا أَعْجَفَهَا رَدَّهَا فِيهِ، وَلاَ يَحِلُّ لِامْرِئٍ يُؤْمِنُ بِاللهِ وَالْيَوْمِ الآخِرِ أَنْ يَلْبَسَ ثَوْباً مِنْ فَيْءِ الْمُسْلِمِينَ حَتَّى إِذَا أَخْلَقَهُ رَدَّهُ فِيهِ"

"It is not lawful for a man who believes in Allah and the Last Day to water another man's field with his water, meaning approaching pregnant women among the captives. It is not lawful for a man who believes in Allah and the Last Day to lie with a woman of the captives until he has ascertained that she is not pregnant. It is not lawful for a man who believes in Allah and the Last Day to sell a portion of the spoils until it has been divided. It is not lawful for a man who believes in Allah and the Last Day to ride a mount from the fayʾ of the Muslims and, when he has worn it out, return it to the fayʾ. And it is not lawful for a man who believes in Allah and the Last Day to wear a garment from the fayʾ of the Muslims and, when he has worn it threadbare, return it to the fayʾ."

The Messenger of Allah made terms with the people of Khaybar and the people of Fadak and al-ʿAwālī, that they would cultivate its land and have half of what it brought forth, and that whenever he wished to remove them from it he would remove them.

When the Messenger of Allah had settled, Zaynab bint al-Ḥārith, the wife of Sallām ibn Mishkam, presented him with a roasted sheep. She had asked which part of the sheep was most beloved to the Messenger of Allah, and was told: the foreleg. So she put a great deal of poison into it, then brought it and set it before the Messenger of Allah. He took the foreleg and chewed a morsel of it but did not swallow it, and it called out to him that it was poisoned. With him was Bishr ibn al-Barāʾ ibn Maʿrūr, who had taken from it as the Messenger of Allah had taken. Bishr swallowed his portion, but the Messenger of Allah spat his out and said:

> "إِنَّ هَذَا الْعَظْمَ لَيُخْبِرُنِي أَنَّهُ مَسْمُومٌ"

"This bone informs me that it is poisoned."

Then he summoned her, and she confessed. He said, "مَا حَمَلَكِ عَلَى ذَلِكِ؟" ("What moved you to this?"). She said that her people had reached a state that was not hidden from him, and that she had said to herself: if he is a king I shall be rid of him, and if he is a prophet he will be informed. The Messenger of Allah pardoned her, and Bishr died of the food he had eaten.

It is said that Umm Bishr bint al-Barāʾ ibn Maʿrūr visited the Messenger of Allah during the illness in which he died, and he said to her:

> "يَا أُمَّ بِشْرٍ، إِنَّ هَذَا الأَوَانَ وَجَدْتُ فِيهِ انْقِطَاعَ أَبْهَرِي مِنَ الأُكْلَةِ الَّتِي أَكَلْتُ مَعَ أَخِيكِ بِخَيْبَرَ"

"O Umm Bishr, this is the hour in which I find the severing of my aorta from that food which I ate with your brother at Khaybar."

As for al-Ḥajjāj, he asked leave of the Messenger of Allah to speak, and the Messenger of Allah said, "قُلْ" ("Speak"). He came to Mecca and found its people seeking out news and questioning riders about the affair of the Messenger of Allah, for word had reached them of his march to Khaybar, and they knew it to be the settlement of the Ḥijāz in fertility, in strength, and in men. When al-Ḥajjāj arrived they said that he had the news, for they did not know that he had accepted Islam, and they asked him to inform them, saying that word had reached them that this man had marched upon Khaybar, the land of the Jews and the fertile country of the Ḥijāz. He said that this had reached him also, and that he had news that would gladden them: that Muhammad had been routed with a rout the like of which they had never heard, and his companions slain with a slaughter the like of which they had never heard, and that Muhammad himself had been taken captive, and that his captors had said they would not kill him until they had sent him to the people of Mecca to be killed by them. So they rose and shouted through Mecca, saying that they were only waiting for Muhammad to be brought a prisoner, to kill him in requital for those of their men whom he had struck down. Al-Ḥajjāj then asked them to help him gather his wealth in Mecca and collect from his debtors, since he wished to go to Khaybar and take what he could from the remnants of Muhammad and his companions before the merchants got there ahead of him. They set about gathering what was his with the greatest haste.

When al-ʿAbbās ibn ʿAbd al-Muṭṭalib heard the report he came to al-Ḥajjāj and said, "وَيْحَكَ مَا هَذَا الْخَبَرُ؟" ("Woe to you, what is this news?"). He answered that Abū al-Faḍl should guard what had been entrusted to him of the matter, for he had used those people to gather his wealth and feared pursuit for three days. Al-ʿAbbās said that he would do so. Then al-Ḥajjāj said that by Allah he had left the son of his brother a bridegroom over the daughter of their king, meaning Ṣafiyyah bint Ḥuyayy.
