# Three Commanders at Mu'tah

After the return from the Umrah, the Messenger of Allah remained in Madinah through Dhu al-Hijjah, the polytheists overseeing that pilgrimage season, and then through Muharram, Safar, and the two months of Rabi'.

The expedition to Mu'tah took place in Jumada al-Awwal of the year eight. The Messenger of Allah dispatched an army of the Muslims to Mu'tah and set over them his cousin Ja'far ibn Abi Talib (ع), saying:

> «إِنْ أُصِيبَ جَعْفَرٌ، فَزَيْدُ بْنُ حَارِثَةَ عَلَى النَّاسِ، فَإِنْ أُصِيبَ زَيْدٌ، فَعَبْدُ اللهِ بْنُ رَوَاحَةَ عَلَى النَّاسِ»

"If Ja'far is struck down, then Zayd ibn Haritha shall lead the people; and if Zayd is struck down, then 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah shall lead the people."

Of the Messenger, 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah said in a poem of his, of which these lines are a part:

> أَنْتَ الرَّسُولُ فَمَنْ يُحْرَمْ نَوَافِلَهُ
> وَالْوَجْهَ مِنْهُ فَقَدْ أَزْرَى بِهِ الْقَدَرُ
> ثَبَّتَ اللهُ مَا آتَاكَ مِنْ حَسَنٍ
> فِي الْمُرْسَلِينَ وَنَصْراً كَالَّذِي نُصِرُوا
> إِنِّي تَفَرَّسْتُ فِيكَ الْخَيْرَ نَافِلَةً
> فِرَاسَةً خَالَفَتْ فِيكَ الَّذِي نَظَرُوا

"You are the Messenger; whoever is denied his bounties and his countenance, fate has dealt meanly with him. May God make firm the good He has given you among the messengers, and a victory like the victory they were granted. I discerned in you good in abundance, a discernment concerning you unlike what others saw."

The Messenger of Allah went out to see Ja'far ibn Abi Talib and his companions off. When he had bidden them farewell and turned back from them, 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah said:

> خَلَّفَ السَّلَامُ عَلَى امْرِئٍ وَدَّعْتُهُ
> فِي النَّخْلِ خَيْرَ مُشَيِّعٍ وَخَلِيلِ

"Peace remain upon a man I bade farewell among the palms, the best of escorts and the best of friends."

They marched on until they halted at Ma'an, in the land of Syria. There word reached them that Heraclius had descended upon Ma'ab, in the land of Balqa', with a hundred thousand of the Romans, and that a hundred thousand more had joined him from Lakhm, Judham, al-Qayn, Bahra' and Bali.

When this news reached the Muslims they remained at Ma'an two nights, considering their situation, and they said:

> «نَكْتُبُ إِلَى رَسُولِ اللهِ صَلَّى اللهُ عَلَيْهِ وَعَلَى آلِهِ فَنُخْبِرَهُ الْخَبَرَ، فَإِمَّا أَنْ يُمِدَّنَا بِالرِّجَالِ وَإِمَّا أَنْ يَأْمُرَنَا بِأَمْرِهِ فَنَمْضِيَ لَهُ»

"Let us write to the Messenger of Allah and inform him of the news, so that either he may reinforce us with men, or he may give us his command and we shall carry it out."

But Ja'far ibn Abi Talib and 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah roused the people, saying:

> «إِنَّمَا خَرَجْنَا نَطْلُبُ الشَّهَادَةَ، وَمَا نُقَاتِلُ النَّاسَ بِعَدَدٍ وَلَا قُوَّةٍ وَلَا كَثْرَةٍ، وَإِنَّمَا نُقَاتِلُهُمْ بِهَذَا الدِّينِ الَّذِي أَكْرَمَنَا اللهُ بِهِ، فَانْطَلِقُوا فَإِنَّمَا هِيَ إِحْدَى الْحُسْنَيَيْنِ: إِمَّا ظُهُورٌ وَإِمَّا شَهَادَةٌ»

"We went out only seeking martyrdom. We do not fight people by numbers, nor by strength, nor by multitude; we fight them only with this religion by which God has honoured us. So set out, for it is one of the two goods: either victory or martyrdom." And the people moved on.

'Abdullah ibn Rawahah said:

> جَلَبْنَا الْخَيْلَ مِنْ أَجَأٍ وَفَرْعٍ
> تُغَرُّ مِنَ الْحَشِيشِ لَهَا الْعُكُومُ
> حَذَوْنَاهَا مِنَ الصَّوَّانِ سِبْتاً
> أَزَلَّ كَأَنَّ صَفْحَتَهُ أَدِيمُ
> أَقَامَتْ لَيْلَتَيْنِ عَلَى مَعَانٍ
> فَأَعْقَبَ بَعْدَ فَتْرَتِهَا جُمُومُ
> فَرُحْنَا وَالْجِيَادُ مُسَوَّمَاتٌ
> تَنَفَّسُ فِي مَنَاخِرِهَا السَّمُومُ
> فَلَا وَأَبِي مَآبَ لَنَأْتِيَنَّهَا
> وَإِنْ كَانَتْ بِهَا عَرَبٌ وَرُومُ
> فَعَبَّأْنَا أَعِنَّتَهَا فَجَاءَتْ
> عَوَابِسَ وَالْغُبَارُ لَهَا بَرِيمُ
> بِذِي لَجَبٍ كَأَنَّ الْبَيْضَ فِيهِ
> إِذَا بَرَزَتْ قَوَانِسُهَا النُّجُومُ
> فَرَاضِيَةُ الْمَعِيشَةِ طَلَّقَتْهَا
> أَسِنَّتُهَا فَتَنْكِحُ أَوْ تَئِيمُ

"We brought the horses from Aja' and Far', their packs heaped with fodder for them. We shod them upon hard flint with a smooth shoe, sleek as though its face were tanned hide. They halted two nights at Ma'an, and after their weariness came fresh vigour. Then we set out, the steeds marked for battle, the hot wind breathing in their nostrils. No, by my father, Ma'ab we shall surely come upon, though Arabs and Romans hold it. We gathered up their reins and they came on scowling, the dust about them a twisted band, in a clamorous host whose helmets, when their crests appear, are as stars. And she who was content in her living, our spearpoints have divorced her: she marries again, or remains a widow."

Then the army pressed on until they came to the borders of Balqa', where the gathered forces of Heraclius, Romans and Arabs together, met them at a village of Balqa' called Masharif. The enemy drew near, and the Muslims withdrew to a village called Mu'tah and drew up their ranks. Over their right wing they placed a man of Banu 'Udhrah called Qutbah ibn Qatadah, and over their left a man of the Ansar called 'Abayah ibn Malik.

The two sides met and fought. Ja'far ibn Abi Talib (ع) took the banner and fought with it, and when the fighting closed hard upon him he leapt down from his sorrel mare and fought the enemy on foot, saying:

> يَا حَبَّذَا الْجَنَّةُ وَاقْتِرَابُهَا
> طَيِّبَةً وَبَارِداً شَرَابُهَا
> وَالرُّومُ قَدْ دَنَا عَذَابُهَا
> كَافِرَةٌ بَعِيدَةٌ أَنْسَابُهَا
> عَلَيَّ إِذْ لَاقَيْتُهَا ضِرَابُهَا

"How fine is Paradise and its drawing near, sweet, and cool its drink. And Rome, its punishment has drawn near, a people of unbelief, remote in kinship; when I meet them, mine it is to strike them."

He fought on (ع) with the banner in his right hand until his right hand was cut off; he took it in his left, and that too was cut off; then he clasped it between his upper arms until he was killed as a martyr. He was thirty-three years old, and God rewarded him for this with two wings by which he flies in Paradise wherever he wishes. It is also said that a Roman struck him a blow that day and cut him in two.

When Ja'far (ع) was martyred, Zayd ibn Haritha took the banner and fought with it until he was pierced through by the spears of the enemy and was killed (رض). When he fell, 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah took it up and went forward on his horse. He began to summon himself down from it, hesitating somewhat, and then he said:

> أَقْسَمْتُ يَا نَفْسُ لَتَنْزِلِنَّهْ
> لَتَنْزِلِنَّ أَوْ لَتُكْرَهِنَّهْ
> إِنْ أَجْلَبَ النَّاسُ وَشَدُّوا الرَّنَّهْ
> مَا لِي أَرَاكِ تَكْرَهِينَ الْجَنَّهْ
> قَدْ طَالَ مَا قَدْ كُنْتِ مُطْمَئِنَّهْ
> هَلْ أَنْتِ إِلَّا نُطْفَةٌ فِي شَنَّهْ
> يَا نَفْسُ إِلَّا تُقْتَلِي تَمُوتِي

"I have sworn, O soul, that you shall dismount; you shall dismount, willing or unwilling. Though the people press on and raise their war cry, why do I see you loathing the Garden? Long have you been at ease. Are you anything but a drop of water in a worn skin? O soul, if you are not slain, you will die."

And he said also:

> هَذَا حِمَامُ الْمَوْتِ قَدْ صَلِيتِ
> وَمَا تَمَنَّيْتِ فَقَدْ أُعْطِيتِ
> إِنْ تَفْعَلِي فِعْلَهُمَا هُدِيتِ

"This is the appointed hour of death; you have come into its heat, and what you longed for you have been given. If you do as the two of them did, you are guided."

By "the two of them" he meant his companions Zayd and Ja'far. Then he went forward and fought until he was killed (رض).

Thabit ibn Aqram, of the Banu al-'Ajlan, then took the banner and gave it to Khalid ibn al-Walid, who rallied with it and drew off, and withdrew with the people.

When the army was stricken, the Messenger of Allah said to his companions:

> «أَخَذَ الرَّايَةَ زَيْدُ بْنُ حَارِثَةَ، فَقَاتَلَ بِهَا حَتَّى قُتِلَ شَهِيداً. ثُمَّ أَخَذَهَا جَعْفَرُ بْنُ أَبِي طَالِبٍ فَقَاتَلَ بِهَا حَتَّى قُتِلَ شَهِيداً»

"Zayd ibn Haritha took the banner and fought with it until he was killed as a martyr. Then Ja'far ibn Abi Talib took it and fought with it until he was killed as a martyr."

Then the Messenger of Allah fell silent, until the faces of the Ansar changed, and they supposed that something they would dislike had occurred in the case of 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah. Then he said:

> «ثُمَّ أَخَذَهَا عَبْدُ اللهِ بْنُ رَوَاحَةَ فَقَاتَلَ بِهَا حَتَّى قُتِلَ شَهِيداً»

"Then 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah took it and fought with it until he was killed as a martyr."

Then he said:

> «لَقَدْ رُفِعُوا إِلَيَّ فِي الْجَنَّةِ فِيمَا يَرَى النَّائِمُ عَلَى سُرُرٍ مِنْ ذَهَبٍ، فَرَأَيْتُ فِي سَرِيرِ عَبْدِ اللهِ بْنِ رَوَاحَةَ ازْوِرَاراً عَنْ سَرِيرَيْ صَاحِبَيْهِ، فَقُلْتُ: عَمَّ هَذَا؟ فَقِيلَ لِي: مَضَيَا وَتَرَدَّدَ عَبْدُ اللهِ بَعْضَ التَّرَدُّدِ، ثُمَّ مَضَى»

"They were raised up to me in the Garden, as a sleeper sees, upon couches of gold; and I saw in the couch of 'Abdullah ibn Rawahah a turning away from the couches of his two companions. I said: What is this for? I was told: The two of them went straight on, while 'Abdullah hesitated somewhat, and then went on."

When Ja'far and his companions had been struck down, the Messenger of Allah came in upon Asma' bint 'Umays and said to her:

> «ائْتِينِي بِبَنِي جَعْفَرٍ»

"Bring me the sons of Ja'far."

She brought them to him, and he smelt them, and his eyes overflowed with tears. She said to him:

> «بِأَبِي أَنْتَ وَأُمِّي؛ يَا رَسُولَ اللهِ مَا يُبْكِيكَ؟ أَبَلَغَكَ عَنْ جَعْفَرٍ وَأَصْحَابِهِ شَيْءٌ؟»

"May my father and mother be your ransom, O Messenger of Allah, what makes you weep? Has anything reached you concerning Ja'far and his companions?"

He said:

> «نَعَمْ؛ أُصِيبُوا هَذَا الْيَوْمَ»

"Yes; they were struck down this day."

Asma' rose crying out, and the women gathered to her. And the Messenger of Allah went out to his household and said:

> «لَا تُغْفِلُوا آلَ جَعْفَرٍ مِنْ أَنْ تَصْنَعُوا لَهُمْ طَعَاماً، فَإِنَّهُمْ قَدْ شُغِلُوا بِأَمْرِ صَاحِبِهِمْ»

"Do not neglect the family of Ja'far in the matter of making food for them, for they are occupied with the affair of their man."

When the news of his death came from Mu'tah, the Messenger of Allah said:

> «لَقَدْ سَرَى فِي مَلَإٍ مِنَ الْمَلَائِكَةِ لَهُ جَنَاحَانِ خَضِيبَانِ أَبْيَضَا الْقَوَادِمِ يَطِيرُ بِهِمَا حَيْثُ يَشَاءُ»

"He has passed on among a company of angels, having two wings dyed with blood, white in their foremost feathers, with which he flies wherever he wishes."

He grieved for him with a heavy grief, for he loved him, and he said:

> «خُلِقَ النَّاسُ مِنْ شَجَرٍ شَتَّى، وَخُلِقْتُ أَنَا وَجَعْفَرُ مِنْ شَجَرَةٍ وَاحِدَةٍ»

"People were created from various trees, but Ja'far and I were created from a single tree."

And in another hadith he said:

> «إِنَّا آلَ عَبْدِ الْمُطَّلِبِ مِنْ شَجَرَةٍ وَاحِدَةٍ، وَأَنَا وَجَعْفَرُ مِنْ غُصْنٍ مِنْ أَغْصَانِهَا، فَأَشْبَهَ خَلْقُهُ خَلْقِي، وَخُلُقُهُ خُلُقِي»

"We, the family of 'Abd al-Muttalib, are from a single tree, and Ja'far and I are from one of its branches; so his form resembled my form, and his character my character."

Qutbah ibn Qatadah al-'Udhri, who had been over the right wing of the Muslims, had charged upon Malik ibn Zafilah, who stood opposite him, and killed him; and he was one of the commanders of the unbelievers on the day of Mu'tah. Qutbah ibn Qatadah al-'Udhri said:

> طَعَنْتُ ابْنَ زَافِلَةَ بْنِ الْإِرَاشِ
> بِرُمْحٍ مَضَى فِيهِ ثُمَّ انْحَطَمْ
> ضَرَبْتُ عَلَى جِيدِهِ ضَرْبَةً
> فَمَالَ كَمَا مَالَ غُصْنُ السَّلَمْ
> وَسُقْنَا نِسَاءَ بَنِي عَمِّهِ
> غَدَاةَ رُقُوقَيْنِ سَوْقَ النَّعَمْ

"I thrust at Ibn Zafilah ibn al-Irash with a spear that passed through him and then snapped. I struck a blow upon his neck, and he swayed as the branch of the salam tree sways. And we drove off the women of his cousins on the morning of Ruquqayn as cattle are driven."

Asma' bint 'Umays said, weeping for Ja'far (ع):

> يَا جَعْفَرَ الطَّيَّارَ خَيْرَ مُضَرِّبٍ
> لِلْخَيْلِ يَوْمَ تَطَاعُنٍ وَشِيَاحِ
> قَدْ كُنْتَ لِي جَبَلاً أَلُوذُ بِظِلِّهِ
> فَتَرَكْتَنِي أَمْشِي بِأَجْرَدَ ضَاحِ
> قَدْ كُنْتُ ذَاتَ حَمِيَّةٍ مَا عِشْتَ لِي
> أَمْشِي الْبَرَازَ وَكُنْتَ أَنْتَ جَنَاحِي
> وَإِذَا دَعَتْ قُمْرِيَّةٌ شَجْواً لَهَا
> يَوْماً عَلَى فَنَنٍ دَعَوْتُ صَبَاحِي
> فَالْيَوْمَ أَخْضَعُ لِلذَّلِيلِ وَأَتَّقِي
> مِنْهُ، وَأَدْفَعُ ظَالِمِي بِالرَّاحِ

"O Ja'far the flier, best wielder of the sword for the horsemen on a day of thrusting and hard fighting. You were a mountain for me whose shade I sheltered in; you have left me walking on bare, sun-struck ground. While you lived for me I was a woman defended; I walked in the open, and you were my wing. And when a dove called out her sorrow one day upon a branch, I called out my own morning lament. Today I bow before the base and guard myself against him, and push away the one who wrongs me with an open palm."

Hassan ibn Thabit said, mourning him and his companions at Mu'tah:

> تَأَوَّبَنِي لَيْلٌ بِيَثْرِبَ أَعْسَرُ
> وَهَمٌّ إِذَا مَا نَوَّمَ النَّاسُ مُسْهِرُ
> لِذِكْرَى حَبِيبٍ هَيَّجَتْ لِي عَبْرَةً
> سَفُوحاً وَأَسْبَابُ الْبُكَاءِ التَّذَكُّرُ
> بَلَى إِنَّ فِقْدَانَ الْحَبِيبِ بَلِيَّةٌ
> وَكَمْ مِنْ كَرِيمٍ يُبْتَلَى ثُمَّ يَصْبِرُ
> رَأَيْتُ خِيَارَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ تَوَارَدُوا
> شَعُوبَ وَخَلْفاً بَعْدَهُمْ يَتَأَخَّرُ
> فَلَا يُبْعِدَنَّ اللهُ قَتْلَى تَتَابَعُوا
> بِمُؤْتَةَ مِنْهُمْ ذُو الْجَنَاحَيْنِ جَعْفَرُ
> وَزَيْدٌ وَعَبْدُ اللهِ حِينَ تَتَابَعُوا
> جَمِيعاً وَأَسْبَابُ الْمَنِيَّةِ تَخْطِرُ
> غَدَاةَ مَضَوْا بِالْمُؤْمِنِينَ يَقُودُهُمْ
> إِلَى الْمَوْتِ مَيْمُونُ النَّقِيبَةِ أَزْهَرُ
> أَغَرُّ كَضَوْءِ الْبَدْرِ مِنْ آلِ هَاشِمٍ
> أَبِيٌّ إِذَا سِيمَ الظُّلَامَةَ مِجْسَرُ
> فَطَاعَنَ حَتَّى مَالَ غَيْرَ مُوَسَّدٍ
> بِمُعْتَرَكٍ فِيهِ الْقَنَا يَتَكَسَّرُ
> فَصَارَ مَعَ الْمُسْتَشْهِدِينَ ثَوَابُهُ
> جِنَانٌ وَمُلْتَفُّ الْحَدَائِقِ أَخْضَرُ
> وَكُنَّا نَرَى فِي جَعْفَرٍ مِنْ مُحَمَّدٍ
> وَفَاءً وَأَمْراً حَازِماً حِينَ يَأْمُرُ
> فَمَا زَالَ فِي الْإِسْلَامِ مِنْ آلِ هَاشِمٍ
> دَعَائِمُ عِزٍّ لَا تَزَالُ وَمَفْخَرُ
> هُمُ جَبَلُ الْإِسْلَامِ وَالنَّاسُ حَوْلَهُمْ
> رِضَامٌ إِلَى طَوْدٍ يَرُوقُ وَيَقْهَرُ
> بَهَالِيلُ مِنْهُمْ جَعْفَرٌ وَابْنُ أُمِّهِ
> عَلِيٌّ وَمِنْهُمْ أَحْمَدُ الْمُتَخَيَّرُ
> وَحَمْزَةُ وَالْعَبَّاسُ مِنْهُمْ وَمِنْهُمُ
> عَقِيلٌ، وَمَاءُ الْعُودِ مِنْ حَيْثُ يُعْصَرُ
> بِهِمْ تُفْرَجُ اللَّأْوَاءُ فِي كُلِّ مَأْزِقٍ
> عَمَاسٍ إِذَا مَا ضَاقَ بِالنَّاسِ مَصْدَرُ
> هُمُ أَوْلِيَاءُ اللهِ أَنْزَلَ حُكْمَهُ
> عَلَيْهِمْ، وَفِيهِمْ ذَا الْكِتَابُ الْمُطَهَّرُ

"A hard night at Yathrib came back upon me, and a care that keeps a man wakeful when others sleep, at the memory of a beloved that stirred in me a flowing tear; and the causes of weeping are remembrance. Yes, the loss of a beloved is an affliction, and how many a noble man is afflicted and then endures. I have seen the best of the Muslims go down to death, one after another, while those who remain behind linger. May God not set far from His mercy the slain who followed one another at Mu'tah, among them Ja'far of the two wings, and Zayd, and 'Abdullah, when they followed one another, all of them, while the causes of death hovered near. On the morning they went forward with the believers, led to death by one of blessed nature and shining face, radiant as the light of the full moon, of the family of Hashim, refusing wrong when it is offered him, bold in the charge. He thrust with the spear until he fell with no pillow beneath him, in a fray where the lances were shattered; and his reward became, together with the martyrs, gardens and green thickets of shade. In Ja'far we used to see something of Muhammad: fidelity, and firm resolve when he gave a command. So there have never ceased to be in Islam, from the family of Hashim, pillars of might and glory. They are the mountain of Islam, and the people about them are as loose stones about a towering peak that dazzles and overpowers. Noble ones are among them: Ja'far, and his mother's son 'Ali, and among them Ahmad the chosen; and Hamzah and al-'Abbas are of them, and of them 'Aqil, the pure sap of the branch from where it is pressed. Through them hardship is relieved in every dark and narrow pass, when the way out grows straitened for people. They are the friends of God: upon them He sent down His judgement, and among them is this purified Book."

And Ka'b ibn Malik said concerning that:

> نَامَ الْعُيُونُ وَدَمْعُ عَيْنِكَ يَهْمُلُ
> سَحّاً كَمَا وَكَفَ الطِّبَابُ الْمُخْضَلُ
> فِي لَيْلَةٍ وَرَدَتْ عَلَيَّ هُمُومُهَا
> طَوْراً أَحِنُّ وَتَارَةً أَتَمَلْمَلُ
> وَاعْتَادَنِي حُزْنٌ فَبِتُّ كَأَنَّنِي
> بِبَنَاتِ نَعْشٍ وَالسِّمَاكِ مُوَكَّلُ
> وَكَأَنَّمَا بَيْنَ الْجَوَانِحِ وَالْحَشَى
> مِمَّا تَأَوَّبَنِي شِهَابٌ مُدْخَلُ
> وَجْداً عَلَى النَّفَرِ الَّذِينَ تَتَابَعُوا
> يَوْماً بِمُؤْتَةَ أُسْنِدُوا لَمْ يُنْقَلُوا
> صَلَّى الْإِلَهُ عَلَيْهِمُ مِنْ فِتْيَةٍ
> وَسَقَى عِظَامَهُمُ الْغَمَامُ الْمُسْبِلُ
> صَبَرُوا بِمُؤْتَةَ لِلْإِلَهِ نُفُوسَهُمْ
> حَذَرَ الرَّدَى وَمَخَافَةً أَنْ يَنْكُلُوا
> فَمَضَوْا أَمَامَ الْمُسْلِمِينَ كَأَنَّهُمْ
> فُنُقٌ عَلَيْهِنَّ الْحَدِيدُ الْمُرْفَلُ
> إِذْ يَهْتَدُونَ بِجَعْفَرٍ وَلِوَائِهِ
> قُدَّامَ أَوَّلِهِمْ فَنِعْمَ الْأَوَّلُ
> حَتَّى تَفَرَّجَتِ الصُّفُوفُ وَجَعْفَرٌ
> حَيْثُ الْتَقَى وَعْثُ الصُّفُوفِ مُجَدَّلُ
> فَتَغَيَّرَ الْقَمَرُ الْمُنِيرُ لِفَقْدِهِ
> وَالشَّمْسُ قَدْ كَسَفَتْ وَكَادَتْ تَأْفِلُ
> قَرْمٌ عَلَا بُنْيَانُهُ مِنْ هَاشِمٍ
> فَرْعاً أَشَمَّ وَسُؤْدُداً مَا يُنْقَلُ
> قَوْمٌ بِهِمْ عَصَمَ الْإِلَهُ عِبَادَهُ
> وَعَلَيْهِمُ نَزَلَ الْكِتَابُ الْمُنْزَلُ
> فَضَلُوا الْمَعَاشِرَ عِزَّةً وَتَكَرُّماً
> وَتَغَمَّدَتْ أَحْلَامُهُمْ مَنْ يَجْهَلُ
> لَا يُطْلِقُونَ إِلَى السَّفَاهِ حُبَاهُمُ
> وَيُرَى خَطِيبُهُمُ بِحَقٍّ يَفْصِلُ
> بِيضُ الْوُجُوهِ تُرَى بُطُونَ أَكُفِّهِمْ
> تَنْدَى إِذَا اعْتَذَرَ الزَّمَانُ الْمُمْحِلُ
> وَبِهَدْيِهِمْ رَضِيَ الْإِلَهُ لِخَلْقِهِ
> وَبِجَدِّهِمْ نُصِرَ النَّبِيُّ الْمُرْسَلُ

"Eyes slept, while the tears of your eye poured down, streaming as water drips from a soaked tent-seam, in a night whose cares came upon me: now I moan, and now I toss without rest. Grief became my familiar, and I passed the night as though I were charged with the watch over the Daughters of the Bier and Simak; and it was as though between my ribs and my inward parts, from what came back upon me, a firebrand had been thrust, in longing for the company who followed one another one day at Mu'tah, laid out where they fell and not carried away. May God bless them, such young men, and may the trailing clouds water their bones. At Mu'tah they gave their souls patiently to God, wary of ruin and fearing to flinch. So they went forward before the Muslims as though they were tall mounts draped in flowing mail, guided by Ja'far and his banner at the head of their foremost rank, and how excellent a foremost man he was, until the ranks were broken apart, and Ja'far lay stretched on the ground where the crowded lines had met. The shining moon was altered at the loss of him, and the sun was eclipsed and all but set. A chief whose building rose high, of Hashim, a lofty branch and a mastery that is not transferred: a people through whom God has protected His servants, and upon whom the revealed Book came down. They surpassed all companies in might and generosity, and their forbearance covered over the ignorant. They do not loose their bonds toward folly, and their speaker is seen deciding by the truth. Bright of face; the palms of their hands are seen to be moist with giving when the barren season makes its excuses. By their guidance God was pleased for His creation, and by their fortune the sent Prophet was aided."

And a man of the Muslims who returned from the expedition of Mu'tah said:

> كَفَى حَزَناً أَنِّي رَجَعْتُ وَجَعْفَرٌ
> وَزَيْدٌ وَعَبْدُ اللهِ فِي رَمْسِ أَقْبُرِ
> قَضَوْا نَحْبَهُمْ لَمَّا مَضَوْا لِسَبِيلِهِمْ
> وَخُلِّفْتُ لِلْبَلْوَى مَعَ الْمُتَغَبِّرِ
> ثَلَاثَةُ رَهْطٍ قُدِّمُوا فَتَقَدَّمُوا
> إِلَى وِرْدِ مَكْرُوهٍ مِنَ الْمَوْتِ أَحْمَرِ

"Grief enough that I returned, while Ja'far and Zayd and 'Abdullah lie in the dust of graves. They fulfilled their vow when they went their way, and I was left behind for trial among those who linger in the dust: three men who were set forward, and went forward, to a hated, crimson watering-place of death."

Those of the Muslims who were martyred at Mu'tah were:

Ja'far ibn Abi Talib (ع), cousin of the Messenger of Allah.
Zayd ibn Haritha, the mawla of the Messenger of Allah.
Mas'ud ibn al-Aswad, of Banu 'Adi ibn Ka'b.
Wahb ibn Sa'd ibn Abi Sarh, of Banu Malik ibn Hisl.

These four were of the Emigrants. And of the Ansar:

'Abdullah ibn Rawahah.
'Abbad ibn Qays.
Al-Harith ibn al-Nu'man.
Suraqah ibn 'Amr.
Abu Kulayb and Jabir, the two sons of 'Amr ibn Zayd, brothers by the same father and mother.
'Amr and 'Amir, the two sons of Sa'd.

These were twelve men in all.
