# On the Road to Mecca

On the Road to Mecca

Concerning fasting while travelling, it was narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq, from his father, from his forefathers (عليهم السلام):

> "أنّ رسول الله سافر في شهر رَمَضان، فأفطر وأَمَرَ مَنْ معه أنْ يُفْطِروا، فتوقّف قومٌ عن الفطر، فسمَّاهم العُصاةَ. وذلك لِأَنَّهُ أَمَرَهُمْ فلم يَأْتَمِرُوا لِأَمْرِهِ."

"The Messenger of Allah travelled in the month of Ramadan, and he broke his fast and commanded those with him to break their fast. Some people, however, held back from breaking the fast, and so he named them the disobedient. That was because he commanded them and they did not obey his command."

Concerning the shortening of the prayer while travelling, it was narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع), from his father, from 'Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع), that the Messenger of Allah said:

> "إِنّ الله عزّ وجلّ أَهْدَى إلى أُمَّتي هَدِيَّةً لم يهدها إلى أحد من الأُمم تَكْرِمَةً لها من الله عزّ وجلّ. قالوا: وما هي يا رسول الله؟ قال: الإفطار وتقصير الصَّلاة في السَّفر، فمن لم يفعل فقد رَدَّ على الله هَدِيَّتَه."

"Allah, Mighty and Majestic, has given my nation a gift that He did not give to any of the nations, as an honour to it from Allah, Mighty and Majestic." They said: "And what is it, O Messenger of Allah?" He said: "Breaking the fast and shortening the prayer while travelling. Whoever does not do so has returned to Allah His gift."

It was narrated from 'Ali (ع) that he said:

> "مَنْ قصَّرَ الصَّلاة في السَّفر وأفطر، فقد قبل تخفيف الله جلّت أسماؤه وكَمُلت صلواته."

"Whoever shortens the prayer while travelling and breaks his fast has accepted the relief of Allah, exalted be His names, and his prayers are complete."

Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn 'Ali al-Baqir said: "Whoever completes his prayer while travelling has done wrong."

He was asked about the prayer on a journey, how it is and how much it is, and he said: "Allah, Mighty and Majestic, says:

> ﴿وَإِذَا ضَرَبْتُمْ فِي الأَرْضِ فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ أَن تَقْصُرُواْ مِنَ الصَّلاَةِ﴾ [النساء: ١٠١]

'And when you travel in the land, there is no blame upon you if you shorten the prayer.'" He said: "Shortening on a journey is obligatory, just as completing the prayer while resident is obligatory."

It was said to him: "O son of the Messenger of Allah, Allah the Exalted said only ﴿فَلَيْسَ عَلَيْكُمْ جُنَاحٌ﴾, 'there is no blame upon you'; He did not say, 'Shorten.' How then is it made obligatory as completing the prayer is made obligatory?" He said: "Has not Allah the Exalted said:

> ﴿إِنَّ الصَّفَا وَالْمَرْوَةَ مِن شَعَآئِرِ اللّهِ فَمَنْ حَجَّ الْبَيْتَ أَوِ اعْتَمَرَ فَلاَ جُنَاحَ عَلَيْهِ أَن يَطَّوَّفَ بِهِمَا﴾ [البقرة: ١٥٨]

'Indeed, al-Safa and al-Marwah are among the rituals of Allah, so whoever performs Hajj to the House or 'Umrah, there is no blame upon him if he goes back and forth between them.' Is it not seen that going between them is obligatory and prescribed? For Allah, Mighty and Majestic, mentioned them in His Book, and the Messenger of Allah enacted it."

In the same way, shortening the prayer on a journey was mentioned by Allah the Exalted and enacted by the Messenger of Allah.

From 'Ali (ع):

> "أنّ رسول الله نَهَى أنْ تُتَمَّ الصَّلاةُ في السَّفَرِ."

"The Messenger of Allah forbade that the prayer be completed in full while travelling."

And Ja'far ibn Muhammad al-Sadiq (ع) said:

> "أَنا بَرِيءٌ مِمَّنْ يُصَلِّي أَرْبَعاً في السَّفَرِ."

"I disown whoever prays four while travelling."

The discussion of this could be drawn out at length. It has been set down here because disagreement has arisen over the obligation of shortening the prayer on a journey, notwithstanding the consensus that the Messenger of Allah did it, and in him lies the model and the example.

The Messenger of Allah then went forward on his departure to Mecca with ten thousand of the Muslims. The Muhajirun and the Ansar marched out with him in full number, and not one of them stayed behind. Sulaym had embraced Islam, and other tribes of the Arabs with them, so all the Muslims were gathered together in the march with the Messenger of Allah.

Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib and 'Abdullah ibn Abi Umayyah ibn al-Mughirah met him at Niq al-'Uqab, between Medina and Mecca, and sought leave to enter his presence, but he did not grant it to them. Umm Salamah spoke to him on their behalf and said: "O Messenger of Allah, your cousin, and the son of your aunt, and your brother-in-law."

He said:

> "لاَ حَاجَةَ لِي بِهِمَا، أَمَّا ابْنُ عَمِّي فَهَتَكَ عِرْضِي، وَأَمَّا ابْنُ عَمَّتِي وَصِهْرِي فَهْوَ الَّذِي قَالَ فِيَّ بِمَكَّةَ مَا قَالَ."

"I have no need of them. As for my cousin, he tore my honour, and as for the son of my aunt and my brother-in-law, he is the one who said of me in Mecca what he said."

When word of this came out to them, Abu Sufyan had a young son of his with him, and he said: "By Allah, he will grant me leave, or I will take this little son of mine by the hand and we will go off into the land until we die of thirst and hunger."

When his words reached the Messenger of Allah, he softened toward them and gave them leave to enter his presence. They greeted him, and they embraced Islam.

Abu Sufyan ibn al-Harith recited verses to him upon his acceptance of Islam, offering his excuse for what had passed from him before. He said:

> لَعَمْرُكَ إِنِّي يَوْمَ أَحْمِلُ رَايَةً ... لِتَغْلِبَ خَيْلُ اللاَّتِ خَيْلَ مُحَمَّدٍ
> لَكَالْمُدْلِجِ الْحَيْرَانِ أَظْلَمَ لَيْلُهُ ... فَهَذَا أَوَانِي حِيْنَ أُهْدَى وَأَهْتَدِي
> هَدَانِيَ هَادٍ غَيْرُ نَفْسِي وَنَالَنِي ... مَعَ اللهِ مَنْ طَرَّدْتُ كُلَّ مُطَرَّدِ
> أَصُدُّ وَأَنْأَى جَاهِداً عَنْ مُحَمَّدٍ ... وَأُدْعَى وَإِنْ لَمْ أَنْتَسِبْ مِنْ مُحَمَّدٍ
> هُمُ مَا هُمُ مَنْ لَمْ يَقُلْ بِهَوَاهُمُ ... وَإِنْ كَانَ ذَا رَأْيٍ يُلَمْ وَيُفَنَّدِ
> أُرِيْدُ لِأُرْضِيَهُمْ وَلَسْتُ بِلائِطٍ ... مَعَ الْقَوْمِ مَا لَمْ أُهْدَ فِي كُلِّ مَقْعَدِ
> فَقُلْ لِثَقِيْفٍ لاَ أُرِيْدُ قِتَالَهَا ... وَقُلْ لِثَقِيْفٍ تِلْكَ غَيْرِيَ أَوْعِدِي
> فَمَا كُنْتُ فِي الْجَيْشِ الَّذِي نَالَ عَامِراً ... وَمَا كَانَ عَنْ جَرَّا لِسَانِي وَلاَ يَدِي
> قَبَائِلُ جَاءَتْ مِنْ بِلاَدٍ بَعِيْدَةٍ ... نَزَائِعَ جَاءَتْ مِنْ سِهَامٍ وَسُرْدَدِ

By your life, on the day I carried a banner so that the horses of al-Lat might overcome the horses of Muhammad, I was like one journeying by night, bewildered, his night grown dark. And now is my hour, when I am given guidance and am guided. A guide other than myself has guided me, and there reached me, with Allah, one whom I had driven off with every driving. I turned away and kept far off, striving, from Muhammad, yet I am called of Muhammad though I claimed no kinship with him. They are what they are: whoever will not speak according to their desire, though he be a man of sound judgement, is blamed and called a liar. I would seek to please them, yet I am no clinging companion of the people, so long as I am not guided in every seat. Say to Thaqif: I desire no fight with her, and say to that Thaqif: threaten some other than me. I was not in the army that struck 'Amir; that was not from the wounding of my tongue nor of my hand. They were tribes that came from distant lands, strays that came from Siham and Surdad.

Al-'Abbas ibn 'Abd al-Muttalib met the Messenger of Allah at al-Juhfah, emigrating with his family. Before that he had remained in Mecca over his charge of the pilgrims' water, and the Messenger of Allah was pleased with him.

When the Messenger of Allah halted at Marr al-Zahran, al-'Abbas said: "Alas for the morning of Quraysh! By Allah, if the Messenger of Allah enters Mecca by force before they come to him and seek his security, it is the ruin of Quraysh to the end of time."

So he mounted the white mule of the Messenger of Allah and rode out until he came to the Arak trees, saying: "Perhaps I will find one of the woodcutters, or a man with milk, or someone with a need who is going to Mecca, so that he may tell them where the Messenger of Allah is, and they may come out to him and seek his security before he enters upon them by force."

On that night Abu Sufyan ibn Harb had come out of Mecca, and with him Hakim ibn Hizam and Budayl ibn Warqa', feeling out the news and looking to see whether they might find word of anything or hear of it. News had been blinded to Quraysh, and nothing had reached them concerning the Messenger of Allah.

Al-'Abbas (رض) said: "By Allah, I was riding on the mule of the Messenger of Allah, seeking what I had come out for, when I heard the speech of Abu Sufyan and Budayl ibn Warqa' as they talked between themselves. Abu Sufyan was saying: 'I have never seen fires such as tonight's, nor an army.'

Budayl said to him: 'These, by Allah, are Khuza'ah, whom the war has kindled.'

Abu Sufyan said: 'Khuza'ah is too lowly and too few for these to be her fires and her army.'"

Al-'Abbas said: "I recognised the voice of Abu Sufyan, so I said: 'O Abu Hanzalah!' He recognised my voice and said: 'Abu al-Fadl?' I said: 'Yes.' He said: 'What is with you? May my father and mother be your ransom!'

I said: 'Woe to you, Abu Sufyan! This is the Messenger of Allah among the people, and by Allah, alas for the morning of Quraysh!' He said: 'What is the stratagem? By my father and my mother!'"

Al-'Abbas said: "I said: 'By Allah, if they take you they will strike off your neck. Mount behind me on the back of this mule, until I bring you to the Messenger of Allah and seek his security for you.'

So he mounted behind me, and the two who were with him turned back, and I brought him along. Whenever I passed a fire of the fires of the Muslims they said: 'Who is this?' Then, seeing the mule of the Messenger of Allah and me upon it, they said: 'The uncle of the Messenger of Allah on his mule.' Until I passed the fire of 'Umar ibn al-Khattab, and he said: 'Who is this?' and rose toward me. When he recognised Abu Sufyan on the back of the mule, he went hurrying toward the Messenger of Allah, and I urged on the mule and outstripped him by as much as a slow beast outstrips a slow man.

I burst in and entered upon the Messenger of Allah, and 'Umar entered upon him and said: 'O Messenger of Allah, this is Abu Sufyan, whom Allah has delivered into our hands.' I said: 'O Messenger of Allah, I have granted him my protection.' Then, when 'Umar pressed the matter, I said: 'Gently, 'Umar. By Allah, were he of the men of Banu 'Adiyy ibn Ka'b you would not have spoken this speech, but you know that he is of the men of Banu 'Abd Manaf.'"

The Messenger of Allah said:

> "إِذْهَبْ بِهِ يا عَبَّاسُ إلى رَحْلِكَ، فَإِذا أَصْبَحْتَ فَأْتِنِي بِهِ."

"Take him, O 'Abbas, to your quarters, and when you rise in the morning bring him to me."

Al-'Abbas said: "So I took him to my quarters, and he passed the night with me. When morning came I brought him to the Messenger of Allah, and when he saw him he said:

> 'وَيْحَكَ يَا أَبَا سُفْيَانَ؛ أَلَمْ يَأْنِ لَكَ أَنْ تَعْلَمَ أَنَّهُ لاَ إِلَهَ إِلَّا اللهُ؟'

'Woe to you, O Abu Sufyan! Has the time not come for you to know that there is no god but Allah?'

He said: 'By my father and my mother, how forbearing you are, how noble, how mindful of kinship! By Allah, I had thought that if there were with Allah another god, he would have availed me something.'"
