[Mumbling] [Unclear] a bit. Absolutely not. As-salamu alaykum. Good. Good. As-salamu alaykum. Wa alaykum as-salam. Rashid Saheb, what page are we on? As-salamu alaykum. Wa alaykum as-salam. As-salamu alaykum. Wa alaykum as-salam. From page 18 of the book... As-salamu alaykum, Mawlana. A'udhu billahi minash-shaytanir-rajim (I seek refuge in God from the accursed Satan). Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim (In the name of God, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful). Allahumma salli 'ala Muhammadin wa 'ala ali Muhammadin wa barik wa sallim (O God, bless Muhammad and the family of Muhammad, and grant peace). Fasl (Chapter). *Thumma inna al-mudabbir ta'ala sarrafa tadbir al-'alam ila Zuhal* (Then indeed the Administrator, exalted is He, delegated the administration of the world to Saturn). Then this, that the administrator of the world... the administrator has... the Administrator, exalted is He, has delegated the administration of the world towards Zuhal (Saturn). Meaning, who is the administrator of the world? *'Ashir al-Mudabbir* (The Tenth Administrator). *'Ashir al-Mudabbir* delegated the administration of the world towards Zuhal. Meaning, towards Zuhal... the administration, whatever it may be, will be of Zuhal. *Bi-maddatihi* (with its substance/matter), from its own substance, from its own affirmations (*ta'yidat*). *Subhanahu... Subhanahu...* Allah, the great one, it is His essence. *Wa tahrikuhu lil-falak* (And its movement for the celestial sphere), and its movement is for the celestial sphere, *fa-yudabbiru al-'alama alfa sana* (so it administers the world for a thousand years), so that it... that world... will administer it for a thousand years. Meaning, who? Zuhal. *Fa-imtazajat al-taba'i' al-madhkura ba'duha bi-ba'd* (Then the aforementioned natures intermingled, some with others). So, the natures that have been mentioned before this, that the various natures were... they became intermingled with each other. *Fa-hadathat al-bukharat wa al-dhababat wa al-amtar* (Then occurred the vapors, the thick clouds, and the rains). Therefore, from that... from their intermingling with each other... of the natures... vapors were produced, and the dense clouds that exist, inside which water collects, so the dark clouds... they were produced. *Wa al-amtar*, and rains occurred, *mutawatira*, continuous rains kept falling. *Ghayra nafi'ah* (not beneficial). It was a rain that was not beneficial. Some... some rains are such that they give benefit. And the rains that fall are not beneficial. In several places, the Holy Quran has mentioned that it is called *matar al-su'* (the evil rain). Meaning, an evil rain. Yes, *matarun su'*... *matar al-su'*. Meaning, they are rains in which impurities (*khaba'ith*) descend, which... from the various... corrupted temperaments, from them, impurities descend, so that is *matar al-su'*. And the rains that are good, in them the... the luminous essences (*fudulat-e-nayyirah*) that were... the purified ones... in the celestial sphere of the zodiacs (*falak-e-buruj*), that have been purified, they descend onto the earth through the rain. They ascend through the rain and descend through the rain... They ascend through vapors and descend through the rain. Who are they? They are the ones who... the essences from our graves... the body that is buried in the grave, its purification occurs in the zodiacs. And the zodiac is divided into 12 zodiacs. Each zodiac has 30 degrees, 30 parts. So, from here, first, the journey of our essence starts from the first degree of the first zodiac, until it reaches the last degree of the last zodiac, so 300... 20 years... 360 years... 360 years pass. Then, until then, then it turns back from there and comes to the first degree again, so 360 years. In this way, its journey is of 720 years. This is what Sayyidna Mu'ayyad says, in the *Tahajjud* prayer, the *du'a* you have for *Tahajjud*, it is of Sayyidna Mu'ayyad. It is of Sayyidna Mu'ayyad al-Shirazi. The book of which we are reading. So, *la tuksiranna ya Rabbi fi hadha al-safarana* (O my Lord, do not prolong our journey in this). O... O Lord, in this world, do not prolong our journey. So, that is... all those... it points towards all those administrations, as to how the matters are. We... meaning, as soon as possible, our matter should be concluded from this world, and we, from here... from the physical world to the psychic world... look, there are many worlds. From the physical world... our physical world that is, from it we have to go to the psychic world. Our spiritual progress is in the psychic world. Meaning, we have to become a *nafs* (soul). Our body has to become a *nafs*. Meaning, *namiyah* (vegetative), *hissiyah* (sensory), *natiqah* (rational). And it has to reach the station of the *surah* (form). That *surah*... that *surah* has to become... what does it have to become? It has to reach the station of the *'aql* (intellect). And when will it reach the station of the intellect? *Yawman ma* (on some day). That journey is very long. *Yawman ma* it will come. But it... when it enters the *haykal* (form/temple) of the Imam, then it is like a fixed deposit. Now, wherever the Imam makes progress, our *surat-e-nayyirah* (luminous form) will make progress with him. So, this is a great station, that the Imam... um... uh... his... he... his *haykal*... *surah*... does not travel alone, but rather travels with his *haykal*, with his forms. Whatever their spiritual journey may be. Mawlana, the way you mentioned the rain (*barsat*), the clouds are very high up... Their level is very high. In the world... the celestial bodies that are there, it's much higher than them. Yes, yes. So then this... uh... the descent (*nuzul*) that happens after our purification, in what form does that happen? It... It wouldn't happen in the form of vapors (*bukharat*)... because the vapors are very low, the clouds are very low... from the surface of the earth. So this... this... مزاج... it is said, *mizaj-e-muntazij*. Ascending and descending, that is called *mizaj-e-muntazij*. So *mizaj-e-muntazij* happens in this way. Ascending is through vapors and this... descending is through the rainwater. So the vapors, after purification, they come in the form of vapor. They would come in the form of vapor, and through the clouds, through the rain, they descend. Yes. And secondly, this... of the *mu'min* and of the *da'i*... their turn... the *da'i*'s turn... happens quickly. Isn't that so? Yes. So that *da'i*'s turn... we... in the era in which we came, our *da'i* today is... The turn... look, the turn... for the turn... for... up to... even for the unbelievers, for the infidels too, this is set, that whether he is a believer or an unbeliever or a hypocrite, for everyone this matter is set, that they will return after 1000 years. Their affirmations (*ta'yidat*) etc., their purification... The purification happens. After purification, they become... the station of affirmations, they benefit others. [Unclear]. Their life span is a thousand years. A thousand years. And those... they were angels in potentiality... in life... they become angels in actuality. Meaning, they now have this... these powers come to them by the command of Allah that they can make great spiritual decisions. Page 18... 18... yes. So... And look, these... these *kuffar* (unbelievers) that are there, their... these times of Ganpati, or such... their... Thursday... uh... gatherings that happen or the worship matters... at that time rains descend. Those rains are *matar al-su'*. They are evil rains. The Holy Quran has mentioned it in three places. And... these rains... there are times for them when... Sayyidna 'Ali says that out of five times, one time is when prayers are accepted. That is *'inda nuzul al-ghayth*, meaning at the time of rainfall. Because that is the time of rain when our essences are descending and ascending. So our prayers are accepted. Because of those essences... because in a purified state... the state in which they went was very raw. But when they returned after being purified, they came back extremely pure and clean and transparent. So... therefore, through their... blessings, all these prayers of ours are accepted. The Mawla-e-Ka'inat... in one place... one time, a Jew... a person had come to you... and he said that Moses was like this, Jesus was like this... all... he mentioned all the people, the prophets, that they had this power. So you... all the companions were sitting, everyone was silent. But Amir al-Mu'minin, peace be upon him, answered him. And he said that you... you say that Moses was like this, our Prophet was like this. You have... in his praise, the... what you have mentioned... it is a sermon of the assembly, it is... in a magnificent way you have mentioned it... that, well... so in it, one mention is this, that... uh... people came to you, to the Messenger of God. You were in Madinah al-Munawwarah... the Master of the Universe... and they said, "O Messenger of God... uh... the rains have completely stopped, and our fields have dried up, and we are very troubled. Please pray." So you prayed. And from the acceptance of the prayer, this happened, that continuous rain began to fall. It rained to such an extent... on one Friday you had prayed. So from that Friday until the next Friday, rains kept falling. So much so that so much rain fell that the same people... came back on Friday. And they said, "O Messenger of God, our fields have filled with water, and we don't have a place to walk. So much water has collected. Please pray." So you said that *khuliqa al-insanu min `ajal* (Man was created of haste). You recited the verse of the Holy Quran. That... that man was created from haste. His nature has haste. So you then prayed, and... the rains stopped. A similar incident occurred in the time of Sayyidna Ghulam Husain Saheb Muqaddas. So... actually what had happened was that... Sayyidna... Ali bin Qutbuddin, who was a great elder of ours, and is buried in Baroda under a tree. Uh... and I remember that Sayyidna Husain bin Hasan, may God sanctify his soul, how many times he asked, "Where is 'Ali bin Qutbuddin?" So I said that, "Mawlana, he is in India, he is buried in Baroda." So he asked, "Is there anyone among his descendants?" I said, "No." "Do you know he wrote a book named *Bahrat al-'Adillah*?" So I said, "I haven't read it, but I have heard that he wrote it." So he said, "You should read that book, it is 'halwa' (a sweet dish)," he said. "It is halwa, it is so... so... it is so enjoyable to read." So what is in it? It is the first book... in the time of Sayyidna Isma'il bin Hibatullah, you had migrated, and the conditions of that time, you wrote in the form of *haqa'iq* (esoteric realities). Which is the first book... I mean, *haqa'iq*... a biography is a biography, but you wrote the biography in *haqa'iq*. And it is a book of great stature. So... in it... he writes of an incident that... we were gathered with Sayyidna Isma'il bin Hiba, and it was the rainy season. And... we were sitting and reading, probably, or there was some gathering, an academic gathering. So you made a mention that, "Look, in the time of the Messenger of God, it happened like this, that these signs of rain appeared. The companions were with you. So... you... the companions said, 'O Messenger of God, what will happen if the rains are continuous?'" So you... uh... you said, "*hawalayna wa la 'alayna*" (around us and not on us). You gestured like this, you gestured with your finger. Looking towards the sky. And after that, what happened was that... the rains were falling in the surroundings, and where you were, there was no rain there. So, Sayyidna Isma'il bin Hibatullah Saheb mentioned this in his gathering. So... so the people saw that rain was falling in the surroundings, and that place of yours is safe. So this... Sayyidna Ghulam Husain Saheb Muqaddas, when... uhm... where had they gone for a trip? Gandipet. Gandipet. They had gone to Gandipet for a trip, Osman Sagar... so... there, a... all the... *Hudud* and *da'wat* members... the community of believers was there. So they were sitting and discussing academic matters. So the signs of rain began to appear. So... you did the same thing, that... you said that, "Look, Sayyidna 'Ali bin Qutbuddin, when he had migrated in the time of Sayyidna Isma'il bin Hibatullah, such an incident had happened, and you had said so." So you also gestured and showed it. And the people saw that... this... rain is falling in the surroundings, and that... you... where you are sitting and the people are sitting, not a single drop of rain fell there. So... this incident... I... once... on the occasion of the migration, when I came to Jeddah, I happened to narrate this incident to... Mulla Khurshid Hasan Saheb Muqaddas. So... Ahmed Khurshid Saheb. So... so he said that, "Ghulam Husain bhai, I was present at that time. I was present in that gathering. That in that gathering, I was present. That I... I was present, and I bear witness that this incident is true." At that time, I was present in that gathering, he said. So, these are the very things... like you were saying, that... the progress of the *du'at*... I mean... their essences progress in 30 years, but they remain... their ancient effects, and the ancient effects become material and affirmation for others. And their own form that is, it always... keeps its gaze towards its remaining essence. That... that... just as Sayyidna Mu'ayyad's account also is, that when you had... the four of your students who were there... Lamak bin Malik... Malik bin Lamak... and Raslan and Yahya bin... Lamak... something like that, four of your students who became great *du'at*. So... they were with you at the end, they were present when you passed away. It was your final state. So... all these students were present with you. So tears were flowing from your eyes. So... they said, "Mawlana, who knows death better and more excellently than you? But there are tears in your eyes?" "Tears in your eyes?" So... he said that, "Look, I... on my... death... am not crying because of its... condition, but rather I am... saying that... *mata yalhaku al-baytu... mata yalhaku al-baytu...* when will the house join... what... when will the house be joined... what... my house... when will... when will it be joined... uhm... uhm... what is that sentence... uhm... a specific sentence, and we... when we were reading with Sayyidna Husain bin Isma'il, this sentence came up. So he said, "What is the meaning of this?" So I said that this is its meaning, and this is Sayyidna Mu'ayyad's sentence. So he was very happy. So that sentence, I don't recall it at the moment... uhm... So it is that my... yes, *mata yalhaku al-baytu ila rabbihi* (When will the house join its Lord?). *Mata yalhaku al-baytu ila rabbihi*. That when my... my house... will be joined with its Lord? So who is the Lord? That is the noble form. It is the noble form. And the house, in which house my form used to reside, that was my body. So... my... my... I have progressed by becoming a form. But my... my body, which served me, with which I performed prayers, performed Hajj, and all... performed good deeds, that poor thing is lying in the grave. So that... my house... when will it be joined with its Lord? This is why my tears are flowing. When I thought of this matter. A story about the rains was also from Sayyidna 'Ali bin Sulayman Saheb. Yes, he was there too. Hasan Khan sent Abdul Malik. Yes, yes, he sent him. And you had said this too, that... if Hasan Khan went alone, it would rain. You had great affection for Sayyidna Hasan Khan. You would always say, "He is my deputy." "He is my deputy." You would always say "deputy"... you would use the word. And you see how strange things happen, that Sayyidna 'Ali bin Sulayman performed the *nass* (appointment of successor) only on Sayyidna Ibrahim. He performed *nass* on only one *da'i*. His own brother was also there... and Sayyidna Muhammad bin Fayed was also there. And then Sayyidna Ibrahim bin Muhammad bin Fayed performed *nass* on his son, who was Isma'il. But Isma'il passed away. Therefore, you performed *nass* on your grandson, Sayyidna Muhammad bin Isma'il. So Sayyidna Muhammad bin Isma'il then performed *nass* on you, on Sayyidna Hasan Khan. But Sayyidna Hasan Khan passed away during the time of Sayyidna Muhammad bin Isma'il. Therefore, you became *ghayr munfarid* (not solitary). You had a long life, Sayyidna Hasan. And an incident about you is also like this, about Sayyidna Hasan... Hasan Khan... that... you were 12 years old, and... uh... Sayyidna 'Ali Saheb... wrote to Sayyidna Ja'far in a letter... that... "Mawlana, a boy has come to us whose age is 12. And he is a Dawoodi boy. And he wants us... to come into our faith, into the Sulaymani path. So we took his... severe test. Just as we have... you gave the example that just as... raw gold is put into the fire. So that it becomes... pure gold. We took such a severe test of his." So you gave its reply. Sayyidna Ja'far, from there... you were in Taybah, Sayyidna Ja'far. So you said that, "We... *al-mu'minu yanzuru bi-nurillah* (The believer sees with the light of God). A believer sees with the light of God, and the luminous power that Allah Ta'ala has given us, with that we are seeing that there is a great station in this boy. *Yakunu lahu sha'nun min sha'n* (He will have a station of great importance). His station will be great. And... he will serve the *da'wah* greatly." And this and that... you praised him greatly. And this boy is 12 years old. And then after that you... came into the *da'wah* and then... you... great... you wrote 70 books... in *haqa'iq*. Your descendants... [Unclear] [Unclear] [Unclear] those people are there. Mulla Khazam Saheb. And Sayyidna Ibrahim Ali Saheb's children are these, right? Hasan 'Ali and others are there, right, Sayyidna Ali Saheb's? *Wa sarat al-ardu bahran muwwajan* (And the earth became a surging sea). And the earth became a sea with tossing waves. *Wa takhammara fi dhalika al-alf ma yushakiluhu tab'u Zuhal min al-hadid wa al-hijarah wa al-nuhas* (And in that millennium fermented that which resembles the nature of Saturn, of iron, stone, and copper). And in that one thousand years, which is the complete administration of Zuhal, in the complete administration, the first one thousand years, in it, ferments were formed, just as the nature of Zuhal was, according to its nature, iron... iron was made. And stone... stones were formed. And copper... copper was made. In copper... the ferments of copper were formed... meaning, leavens were created. *Wa sarat al-ardu maghmurah bil-miyah* (And the earth became submerged in water). And the whole earth was filled with water. *Wa mayyaza kullu jinsin min al-ashya'i ila jinsihi* (And every species of things was distinguished into its species). The distinction between good and bad was made. *Wa khammarat khama'iru al-Sudan wa al-zarra'ah wa ahl al-shaqa wa al-naqd* (And the leavens of the Sudanese, the farmers, the wretched, and the severe fermented). And the leavens that were formed were of the Sudanese... who... who do farming, those people, and the wretched ones, meaning the unfortunate ones, and who are of a harsh nature... tyrannical people, theirs. And... then indeed Jupiter accompanied Zuhal in the administration for a thousand years. And after that, the one that... the celestial sphere that is, the celestial sphere of Jupiter is... between Zuhal and Mars, Jupiter comes. So Jupiter... assisted... became its companion, of Zuhal, in the administration. For one year... for one thousand years. In the second thousand years... I'm talking about the Sudanese people, why was it... from the beginning it was... [unclear] I don't know, it was like that. Their ferments were formed within Zuhal. And the Jupiter that is, it is... *Sa'd-e-Akbar* (the greater good fortune). Meaning, *sa'dayn* is said for... Jupiter and Venus. So two... two planets are very good. One is Jupiter and the second is Venus. Yes. And... uh... Jupiter that is... so it is said that... *al-Mushtari bayna al-nahsayn* (Jupiter is between the two inauspicious ones). Meaning, the grave of the Messenger of God is between two people. Abu Bakr and 'Umar. Yes. Mawlana, the graves they show in the map, that is at your feet, isn't it? It is... yes... it's not at the feet... We cannot pray with them, right? It's not at the feet, but it is set apart. Set apart. Yes. And of both... one is behind the other. Abu Bakr, and behind him is 'Umar. Yes. That is what they say. That is what is made above. What is below, who knows... The original is below. Below, in the cellar. Above, it is just... of the Messenger of God. They show that. And from above, one is not allowed to see it. Yes, yes. They don't let you see from inside. They don't even let you go near the lattice. They don't let you go near the lattice. There are sentries there. The spot of the *ras* (head), that is the... the *ras* of the *kiari* (garden) is the highest because the Prophet's chamber is right there. Your noble chamber is adjacent to it. In the heavenly *kiari*. The spot of the *ras* is the highest spot. Yes. Because... the heart of Madinah al-Munawwarah is the Prophet's Mosque. And the heart of the Prophet's Mosque is that spot of the *ras*. The *mihrab* of the Prophet is also not... no, the *mihrab* of the Prophet is also not... it also does not come in that. It does not come in the *kiari*. It does not come in the *kiari*. One *mihrab* comes in the *kiari*. One *mihrab*... yes, one *mihrab* comes, that's right. One *mihrab* comes. Where... the pillar... the one that is called the spot of the Prophet. So the 14 *rak'at* prayer that we pray, in that the *mihrab* comes. Two *rak'at* we pray at the *ras*. Then two *rak'at*... at the spot of repentance (*maqam al-Tawbah*), at the pillar of repentance. And then two *rak'at* are at the pillar of *Hannanah*. Six have been done. And then... after that... at two *rak'at* at the spot of... at the pillar of 'Ali we pray. Yes, on which the pillar of 'A'isha is. It says 'A'isha. Then, eight *rak'at* have been done. After eight *rak'at*, that is... at the spot of the Prophet. These are 10 *rak'at*. And then... in the *kiari* somewhere... anywhere, two *rak'at*. These are 12. And then at the spot of Gabriel. So these are 14. But in the 14, the eight are more meritorious. Which are prayed at the pillars. And they indicate the bearers of the Throne. Yes. That *ras*... at the *ras*... at the spot of... the pillar of repentance, at the pillar of 'Ali, and... at the pillar of *Hannanah*. These four... at these four spots where two *rak'at* each are prayed, they are more meritorious than the remaining... *rak'at*. Yes. And then the Messenger of God says that in my mosque there is such a spot that if people knew its virtue, they would draw lots to go there. Yes. And which spot is that? That is the spot of repentance. The Messenger's grave which is below... Imam Husayn etc's graves... the surface of the earth was above at that time... below... how was it then? Was the ground lower? No, the ground was not lower... I think that... by digging... it was probably made lower. Perhaps. It was dug that much? Look at Imam Husayn's, how far below it is. We went there, didn't we? We had to go down. Yes, we had to go down. And we also went down at Abbas's. I didn't understand the matter then. Yes, yes. That it's below. Meaning, it's almost this much... Yes. When the second time... the second year came, so Jupiter when... became a companion of Zuhal... in the administration... for a thousand years, so its heat... dried up most of the moistures. So due to its heat, most of the moistures... dried up. He's re-reading it, it seems. [Unclear] *Wa mayyaza ma yushakilu...* all the natures. [Unclear] Then, in the third year, in the third thousand years, then Mars... became the companion of Zuhal... in the administration. For one year... for one thousand years. Third... third thousand years. *Wa huma al-nahsan* (And they are the two inauspicious ones). So both are... inauspicious planets. Zuhal and Mars. So because of Mars and because of this administration of Zuhal, its heat and its dryness, most of the moistures... dried up. *Wa fattatat al-jibalu al-mun'aqidah* (And the solid mountains were crumbled). And... so much so that... the big mountains... broke... and... in the millennium of Zuhal... they were turned... into sand. And the small animals that are malicious... appeared at that time. Like rats... and... cats. And things like that. And from the minerals... and from the beasts and the animals and the venomous creatures, and the leavens of the powerful, the elites, and the brave people were formed. And the... good people and the brave people, their... leavens were formed. The beginning of creation... in the mention of the creation of crawling creatures, rats and cats are mentioned. Yes. So, this dinosaur etc. that science talks about... So there is no mention of that with us... no. No. It must be fiction. Because they speak of it as a fact. Then after that, the Sun accompanied... Zuhal, in the administration... for one thousand years, in the fourth. In the fourth thousand years, the Sun was with it... with Zuhal. So it removed that darkness. Whatever darkness had fallen, it was dispelled. The clouds... and whatever clouds had gathered... on the earth, all of them were removed. And the rains... fell with moderation. And leavens were formed in it... which are... of kings and of great people... leavens were formed. From the noble things, like the ruby and gold... so much so that in minerals, ruby and gold were also... appeared in this. And the animals which are compatible with that, the good... noble animals were created. And in the atmosphere, moderation was created. Then Zuhra (Venus) accompanied... Zuhal. Then Zuhra was with it. For one thousand years... yes. Zuhra is... then with Zuhal, for one thousand years, it came. Its... became a companion by being with it. Fifth... in the fifth year. *Wa khammarat...* and in it, the... who write... who write books, they... and the vizier, and who do accounting, were created. In the fifth... the leavens of the Arabs were formed, and of women, and of people of leisure, and... those who sing and play instruments, those people, and of the... sweet water springs were formed. So rains fell moderately. And in its administration, trees... trees that have fruits, and... good... fragrant... fruits... appeared. And birds appeared in the air. And they... spread. And animals of moderate nature and beneficial ones were created. All this is a prelude to the creation of the human person. And all these things are becoming a prelude... that for the coming of the human person, a prelude is being prepared for 6000 years. Then indeed 'Utarid (Mercury) accompanied... Zuhal. Then 'Utarid... is... the companion of Zuhal... in the administration, for one thousand years... in the seventh... in the sixth year. So... the rains... increased... and with moderation. And the natures... with refinement. And... the plants increased in the land... in its one thousand years. The leavens of... the Arabs were formed, and of women, and of people of leisure... yes, that's it. And from the noble things, like the ruby and gold... here it is written... in it, the... of kings and of great people... the leavens were... were spread... I mean, fermented. In the fifth, the leavens of the Arabs were formed, and of their women and people of leisure... and... those who sing and play instruments, those people, and... the sweet water springs were formed. Then it was... at the end of its administration... when its final administration came... and the beginning of the administration of the Moon is... and... this is the final administration of 'Utarid, and the administration of the Moon has begun. So *zuhur al-shakhs al-bashari* (the appearance of the human person)... so the human person appeared. In the seventh thousand years, the human appeared. *Nabatan min al-ardi* (as a plant from the earth). And how did that happen? As a plant... from the earth. As Allah Ta'ala says, *wa-Allahu anbatakum min al-ardi nabata* (And God has caused you to grow from the earth as a growth). As... Allah Ta'ala says that Allah Ta'ala has created you... from the earth... by making you grow like a plant. Yes, this is a verse of the Holy Quran. So it means there are two kinds of our creation. One is from the earth, and one is from the spiritual parents. So the creation from the earth is more excellent and higher. And the creation from the spiritual parents is lower than that in comparison. Our chapter is finished, Insha'Allah we will do the second chapter tomorrow. May God accept it from us and make it reach. Fatihah. To the soul of Sayyidna al-Mu'ayyad... Shirazi... and may He increase his blessings... and his support... and that he accepts from us the benefit and giving benefit in the best way possible... by the sanctity of our master... and the Ahl al-Bayt... Fatihah. Bismillahirrahmanirrahim. Al-hamdu lillahi Rabb al-'alamin. Ar-Rahman ar-Rahim. Maliki yawmid-din. Iyyaka na'budu wa iyyaka nasta'in. Ihdinas-sirat al-mustaqim. Sirat alladhina an'amta 'alayihm, ghayril-maghdubi 'alayihm wa lad-dallin. And to the lord of the two seas, Sayyidna... al-Mutlaq in the two islands of India and Sindh... and for the elevation of the station... of our master... and for our master... Ghulam Husain... son of Sayyidna... may God sanctify his soul... may Allah elevate his station in the highest of ranks and protect him and grant him health... from all illnesses... and the evils of the enviers and the enemies... and by the sanctity of our master... the Imam of the time... and his holy Ahl al-Bayt... Fatihah. Bismillahirrahmanirrahim. Al-hamdu lillahi Rabb al-'alamin. Ar-Rahman ar-Rahim. Maliki yawmid-din. Iyyaka na'budu wa iyyaka nasta'in. Ihdinas-sirat al-mustaqim. Sirat alladhina an'amta 'alayihm, ghayril-maghdubi 'alayihm wa lad-dallin.
