# Knowledge That Will Not Save You

In the Name of Allah, the Most Compassionate, the Most Merciful. All praise belongs to Allah alone, the Lord of all the worlds, and may the blessings and peace of Allah be upon His Messenger Muhammad and upon all of his descendants and his followers.

My dear beloved son and true friend, may Allah the Exalted grant you a long life spent in His worship and obedience, and may He set you upon the path of His beloved ones. Know that the fountain of all good counsel is the holy person of the Prophet Muhammad (ع), for the foundation of every counsel rests upon his sayings and his way, his outward conduct and his inward states alike. Any counsel that runs contrary to his sayings and his way is of no benefit whatsoever. Countless words of advice have already been written and handed down in the light of his sayings and his way. If you have received guidance from them, then you have no need of any counsel from me. But if you have taken no benefit from the counsels of the Prophet (ع), then tell me: in all these years that have passed, what knowledge have you truly acquired from me?

My dear beloved son, among the counsels the Prophet (ع) gave to his community is this saying of his:

(علامة إعراض الله تعالى عن العبد اشتغاله بما لا يعنيه، و إِنّ امرأ ذهبت ساعة من عمره في غير ما خلق له من العبادة، جدير ان تطول عليه حسرته)

"A servant's preoccupation with matters that do not concern him is a sign that Allah has withdrawn His special favor from him. And if even a single hour of a servant's life passes in the pursuit of something other than that for which Allah created him, then it is fitting that his sorrow over it should be long."

The Prophet (ع) has furthermore said:

(من جاوز الأربعين ولم يغلب خيره على شرّه فليتجهّز إلى النّار)

"Whoever passes forty years of age and the good within him still does not prevail over the evil, let him prepare himself for the Fire."

In this counsel there is sufficiency for the people of knowledge.

My dear beloved son, it is easy to give such advice, but the difficulty lies in accepting it, for to the taste of those who follow their desires it is bitter, since forbidden things are beloved in their hearts. This is especially so for the one who is a seeker of formal learning, occupied with the advancement of his own self and with the distinctions of this world. Such a person supposes that bare knowledge by itself will be his salvation and his deliverance, and that he stands in no need of action. This is the belief of the philosophers. Glory be to Allah the Mighty. This deluded one does not even realize that once he has acquired knowledge, if he does not act upon it, the proof against him is only the more firmly established. Does he not know that the Prophet (ع) said:

(أشدّ النّاس عذابا يوم القيامة عالم لا ينفعه الله بعلمه)

"The most severely punished of people on the Day of Resurrection is a scholar whom Allah did not benefit through his knowledge."

It has been related that Shaykh Junaid al-Baghdadi (رض) was seen in a dream after his death, and he was asked: "O Abu al-Qasim, what news do you bring of your state?" He replied:

(طاحت تلك العبارات، و فنيت تلك الإشارات، و ما نفعنا إلا ركيعات ركعناها في جوف اللّيل)

"Those fine expressions came to nothing, and those subtle allusions perished, and nothing profited us except a few humble cycles of prayer that we prayed in the depth of the night."

My dear beloved son, do not be bankrupt of good deeds, and do not be empty of inner states, and be certain that bare knowledge does not take you by the hand. Consider its likeness. Suppose a man in the wilderness had ten Indian swords along with other weapons, and suppose he were brave and a man of war, and then a great and terrifying lion charged upon him. What do you think? Would the weapons ward off its harm without his drawing them and striking with them? It is known that they ward off nothing except by being wielded and by striking. In just this way, if a man were to read and learn a hundred thousand points of knowledge and yet not act upon them, they would profit him nothing except through action.

Its likeness again is a man who has a fever and a bilious illness whose cure is in certain medicines, yet the cure is not attained except by taking them. As the poet has said:

كرمي دو هزار رطل همي بيمائي * تا مي نخوري نباشدت شيدائي

"Even if you were to buy two thousand pounds of wine, you would not be made drunk by it until you drink."

And if you were to study knowledge for a hundred years and gather a thousand books, you would not be made ready for the mercy of Allah the Exalted except through action. Hear what the Quran says in this regard:

(وَأَنْ لَيْسَ لِلْإِنْسَانِ إِلَّا مَا سَعَى)

"And that man shall have nothing but that for which he strives." (Quran, an-Najm: 38)

This establishes that a human being attains success only through genuine effort and striving. My dear beloved son, I know you may have read that this verse was abrogated. Let us grant that it was. But then what do you say about these words of Allah:

"So whoever does an atom's weight of good will see it, and whoever does an atom's weight of evil will see it." (Quran, 99:7 to 8)

(فَمَنْ كَانَ يَرْجُو لِقَاءَ رَبِّهِ فَلْيَعْمَلْ عَمَلاً صَالِحًا)

"So whoever hopes for the meeting with his Lord, let him do righteous work." (Quran, al-Kahf: 110)

(إِنَّ الَّذِينَ آمَنُوا وَعَمِلُوا الصَّالِحَاتِ كَانَتْ لَهُمْ جَنَّاتُ الْفِرْدَوْسِ نُزُلاً خَالِدِينَ فِيهَا لاَ يَبْغُونَ عَنْهَا حِوَلاً)

"Indeed, those who believe and do righteous deeds, for them the Gardens of Firdaws shall be a welcome abode, in which they will dwell forever, never desiring any removal from it."

And in another place the Exalted has said:

(إِلَّا مَنْ تَابَ وَ آمَنَ وَعَمِلَ صَالِحًا)

"Except for those who repented, and believed, and did righteous work."

And what do you say about these noble sayings of the Prophet (ع)? He said:

"Islam is built upon five things: to testify that there is none worthy of worship but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah; to establish the prayer; to give the alms; to fast the month of Ramadan; and to perform the pilgrimage to the House for whoever is able to find a way to it."

And he said:

"Faith is affirmation with the tongue, assent with the heart, and action with the limbs."

After all this, should a thought arise in your heart that I am claiming a servant enters Paradise not by the grace of Allah but solely by his own deeds, then know that you have not understood my meaning. On the contrary, what I am saying is that a servant enters Paradise through the favor, generosity, and blessings of Allah. Yet unless that servant makes himself deserving of Allah's mercy through worship and obedience, he will not be in a position to receive that mercy and favor. And I do not assert this merely on my own authority. Rather, Allah the Exalted Himself says:

"Indeed, the mercy of Allah is near to those who do good." (Quran, 7:56)

How, then, will a servant enter Paradise without the mercy of Allah the Exalted? I repeat this weighty point: how will a servant enter Paradise without the mercy of Allah? And if someone should argue that one enters Paradise on account of faith alone, then know that there lie ahead many formidable valleys, that is, obstacles. The first and most daunting of them is to carry one's faith safely to the very end.
