# The Striving That Mercy Meets

My dear son, be firmly convinced of this: without effort you will not find its reward.

Let me tell you of a man among the Children of Israel who worshipped Allah the Exalted with great devotion for seventy years. Allah willed to display him before the angels, and so, as a test, He sent an angel down to him. The angel said:

"Allah, the Holy, says that you have tormented yourself to no purpose, for with all this worship you are not fit to enter Paradise."

When this message reached him, the worshipper replied:

"We were created for His worship and servitude, and it is fitting that we should serve Him, no matter what. He is the Owner of all things and of all people, myself among them, and He is the All-Powerful."

The angel then returned to the Presence of Allah the Exalted and said:

"O my Lord, You know best what Your servant has said."

Upon this Allah the Exalted said: since this servant of Ours does not turn his face away from Our worship and Our service, We too, in Our generosity, will not turn Our Face away from him.

> اشهدوا يا ملائكتي أنّي قد غفرت له

"O My angels, bear witness, all of you, that I have forgiven him."

My dear son, so long as you do not act, you will not find the reward. Hear now what the Messenger of Allah (may Allah bless him and grant him peace) says:

> حاسبوا أنفسكم قبل أن تحاسبوا، و زنوا أعمالكم قبل أن توزنوا

"Take account of yourselves before you are taken to account, and weigh your deeds, that is, examine and correct their shortcomings, before your deeds are weighed and judged."

Ali (رض) said:

> من ظنّ أنّه بدون الجهد يصل فهو متمنّ. ومن ظنّ أنّه ببذل الجهد يصل فهو مستغن

"Whoever supposes that he will arrive without striving is a wishful dreamer, and whoever supposes that he will arrive by the mere expending of his effort is presuming himself in no need."

Hasan al-Basri said:

> طلب الجنّة بلا عمل ذنب من الذّنوب

"To seek Paradise without deeds is a sin among the sins."

And another intimate of Allah said:

> علامة الحقيقة ترك ملاحظة العمل لا ترك العمل

"The mark of realized truth is to leave off admiring one's own action, not to leave off the action itself." One should act without regarding one's own act with pride, yet one must never abandon the doing of good deeds, even where the risk of self-admiration is present.

Our master of both worlds, the Prophet Muhammad, expresses this truth more eloquently, more clearly, and more beautifully than any of the sayings above:

> الكيّس من دان نفسه و عمل لما بعد الموت، و الأحمق من اتّبع هواه وتمنّى على الله تعالى الأمانيّ

"The intelligent one is he who calls his own soul to account and works for what lies after death; and the fool is he who follows the desires of his soul and yet indulges vain hopes upon Allah the Exalted." In some narrations the wording adds: and hopes for Allah's forgiveness.

My dear son, how many nights have you kept awake, rehearsing your knowledge and poring over books, denying sleep to yourself? I do not know what the motive in this was. If it was to seize some portion of this world, to draw in its worthless goods, to secure its offices, and to boast over your peers and equals, then:

> فويل لك ثمّ ويل لك

"Woe unto you, and again woe unto you."

But if your aim in it was to revive the way of the Prophet (may Allah bless him and grant him peace), to refine your character, and to break the soul that commands to evil, then:

> فطوبى لك ثمّ طوبى لك

"Blessedness be yours, and again blessedness be yours."

Truly he spoke well who said in verse:

> سهر العيون لغير وجهك ضائع * و بكاؤهن لغير فقدك باطل

"The wakefulness of the eyes for anything but Your Countenance is wasted, and the weeping of the eyes for the loss of anything but You is in vain."

My dear son, hear this prophetic tradition:

> عش ما شئت فإنّك ميّت، و أحبب ما شئت فإنّك مفارقه؛ و اعمل ما شئت فإنّك مجزيّ به

"Live as you wish, for you shall surely die. Love what you wish, for you shall surely be parted from it. And do what you wish, for you shall surely be recompensed for it."
