# A Prayer for the Road

My dear son, in this book I have now answered every question you put to me. Gather your resolve, act upon all that it contains, and do not forget me in your supplications, your Du'a.

You also asked that I write out a prayer for you to keep upon your tongue at all times. For that, seek out the supplications preserved in the books of hadith, the traditions of the Prophet Muhammad (ع), and above all in the Sahah Sitta, the six most trustworthy of his collections, and commit them to memory. Many supplications have likewise reached us through the Ahl al-Bayt, the family of the Prophet (ع); seek them there as well. And recite this supplication in particular at all times, and especially in the moments that follow each of your prayers:

> «ألّهمّ إنّي أسألك من النّعمة تمامها، و من العصمة دوامها، و من الرّحمة شمولها، و من العافية حصولها، و من العيش ارغده، و من العمر أسعده، و من الإحسان أتمّه، ومن الإنعام أعمّه، و من الفضل أعذبه، و من اللّطف أنفعه
>
> ألّهمّ كن لنا و لا تكن علينا
>
> ألّهمّ اختم بالسعادة آجالنا. و حقّق بالزّيادة آمالنا، و اقرن بالعافية غدوّنا و آصالنا، و اجعل إلى رحمتك مصيرنا و مآلنا، و اصبب سجال عفوك على ذنوبنا، و منّ علينا بإصلاح عيوبنا، و اجعل التّقوى زادنا، و في دينك إجتهادنا، وعليك توكّلنا و اعتمادنا. اللّهمّ ثبتنا على نهج الإستقامة، وأعذنا في الدّنيا من موجبات النّدامة يوم القيامة، و خفّف عنّا ثقل الأوزار، و ارزقنا عيشة الأبرار، واكفنا ما اهمّنا في هذه الدّار و في تلك الدّار واصرف عنّا شرّ الأشرار و كيد الفجّار و اعتق رقابنا و رقاب آبائنا و أمّهاتنا و إخواننا وأخواتنا من النّار، برحمتك يا عزيز يا غفار، يا كريم يا ستّار يا خالق اللّيل و النّهار خلّصنا من همّ الدّنيا و عذاب القبر و النّار يا عليم يا جبّار، يا الله، يا ألله، يا ألله، برحمتك يا أرحم الرّاحمين، و يا أول الأوّلین، و يا آخر الآخرین، و يا ذا القوّة المتين، ويا راحم المساكين، و يا أرحم الرّاحمين، لا إله إلاّ أنت سبحانك إنّي كنت من الظّالمين. و صلّى الله على سيّدنا محمّد و آله وصحبه أجمعين، و الحمد لله ربّ العالمين.»

O my Allah! I seek from You the fullness and perfection of Your blessings; I seek the permanence of inward and outward purity; I seek the all-encompassing breadth of Your mercy; I seek the attainment of health; I seek increase in my sustenance; I seek happiness in my life; I seek true and lasting success in this life; I seek the completion of noble qualities; I seek from Your rewards the most abundant reward; I seek from Your plenitude the sweetest plenitude; I seek from Your favors the most plentiful favor; I seek from all deeds the deed that is best; I seek from all knowledge the knowledge that is most beneficial; and I seek from all sustenance the sustenance that is most wholesome.

O my Allah! Be on our side and grant us benefit; do not burden us but protect us from harm. O my Allah! Grant us salvation at our death; reform our deeds; grant us safety in Your days and nights; extend Your mercy to us in our homes and in our possessions; cover our sins and faults with the veil of Your forgiveness; do us the favor of correcting all our shortcomings, inward and outward; and grant us confidence and reliance upon You.

O my Allah! Grant us steadfastness and perseverance in our Deen, our religion and path to God. Save us from deeds in this world that would become a source of shame and humiliation on the Day of Judgment. Lighten the burden of our sins; grant us the life of the pious; be sufficient for us in all our affairs; and protect us from the evil of the evildoers. Liberate us and our forebears from the Fire of Hell, from debt, and from oppression. O You the Victorious One, Ya Aziz! O You the Forgiving One, Ya Ghaffar! O You the Generous One, Ya Kareem! O You the Coverer of Faults, Ya Sattar! O You the Forbearing One, Ya Haleem! O You the Compeller, Ya Jabbar! O You the Magnificent One, Ya Azeem! O You Who Subdues all things, Ya Qahhar! O Allah! O Allah! O Allah! O You the Compassionate One in this world, Ya Rahman! O You the Merciful One in the life hereafter, Ya Raheem! O You the Greatest of the Merciful, Ya Arhamu ar-Rahimeen! You are the Granter of boundless mercy. And may the mercy and blessings of Allah descend always upon Muhammad (ع), the finest of all creation from eternity to eternity, and upon his descendants, and upon his companions. All praise belongs solely to Allah, the Lord of all the Universes, Rabb ul-'Alameen.

This book comes to an end with the help of Al-Malik, the Absolute Sovereign, and Al-Wahhab, the Giver of all.
