I had explained to you yesterday about the gates of hell, how many there are. There are seven gates to hell, and peeking into those gates or stepping into those gates is also necessary for those who have to endure the punishment. But entering is one thing, and stepping into the gate is another. Peeking into the gates is yet another thing. As I said, these gates are designated in this very world, and they are related to animals, plants, and minerals. And those are the seven gates.

And these seven gates, that is called *'Azab-e-Adna* (the lesser punishment), and after that, the punishment they receive—whoever is to be punished receives it—they have to face the *'Azab-e-A'traf* (the punishment of the heights). I will detail the *'Azab-e-A'traf*. And after that is the third punishment, which is called *'Azab-e-Safra* (the punishment of the lowest), which I said was *Jahannam-e-Kubra* (the Great Hell), which is in the depths of the earth, which is called the *Sanduq-ul-Qudrat* (Chest of Power). And they have to suffer the punishment of that *Jahannam-e-Kubra*, and this is the third punishment they endure.

Now, the question is, who receives this punishment? As I told you, those who engage in *kufr* (disbelief) and *ilhad* (heresy), the *mushrik* (polytheists), the *mufsid* (corrupters), and those who follow other religions of the world, who are not followers of Islam, meaning they are not *mo'min* (believers). The non-believers, all of them, are going to be afflicted. Those who are not *Sulaymani*, all of them are going to be afflicted. No one will be spared. You might think that by being a Muslim, by reciting the *kalima*, one will be spared—they will not be spared. However, it is true that in their confinement, in their restriction, in their punishment, in their crime, a slight reduction (*takhfif*) is made. And how that reduction happens has a great delicacy to it, which you will not be able to understand, how that reduction occurs. But in any case, when I tell you about the punishment of hell, the paths of hell, then when the mention of these seven paths comes, in the mention of those seven paths you will learn how this reduction happens for them.

You understand? So I had said that the believers (*mo'minin*) cannot escape this either, unless they have done something such that, if any such act has been committed by a believer, if a major sin (*gunah-e-kabira*) has been committed by him... if he has... the major sins are how many? Five. The first sin is *shirk* (polytheism). To associate a partner with Allah. And for three days, I have been continuously explaining this to you in detail, what *shirk* is. *Shirk billah* (associating partners with God) is what it's called. And who are the *mushrikin* (polytheists)? I have explained the differences between *mushrik*, *kafir* (disbeliever), *mulhid* (heretic), and *murtadd* (apostate). So, this *shirk* is the first and foremost sin. After *shirk*, which is the next biggest sin? It is falsehood (*kizb*). You will say, "Sir, what about lying for a good cause?" This is the decree of the Sadiq (the Truthful One), not our decree. A lie is totally a lie. A lie is not connected to any expediency (*maslahat*) or any other consideration. A lie is a lie. *Al-kizbu kizbun* (a lie is a lie). The third sin is drinking alcohol (*sharab-noshi*). The fourth sin is fornication (*zina-kari*). The fifth sin... I mean, these are the ranks (*darajat*). The biggest sin is *shirk*. After that, as I mentioned, is lying, and after lying is alcohol, after that is fornication, and after that is murder (*qatl*). These are the five sins that are considered major sins (*gunah-e-kabira*), and although, to be sure, the Qur'an-e-Majid has mentioned them in various places, not in one place with this detail, but has explained it in different ways at different places.

But why did these become major sins? Let me explain that a little, because this matter does not enter our minds. What is this about? Today, all of Europe is drinking this thing, so are they all fools? Are they all worthless? These things don't occur to us. So I have told you one thing from the beginning, and I hope you keep that thing in mind: that we are pure (*pak*), we are pure (*pakiza*). We are people who have fallen from the higher realm (*'alam-e-ufuq*), but we fell with regret (*nadamat*). And we are among the regretful (*nadimin*), and *summa-n-najji-l-ladhina-t-taqaw wa nadharu-z-zalimina fiha jithiyya* (Then We will save those who feared Allah and leave the wrongdoers within it, kneeling). We are the first among those who will be freed from this prison. You are among those who will be freed from prison, and you want to become light, yet you have tied a weight to your feet. It makes no sense. If you want to be light, then get rid of your weight. So, don't become heavy, don't involve yourself in your sins.

Now, what happens is that you are regretful (*nadim*), you are a *Sulaymani*. Your body is filtered. Everyone's body... since your soul (*atma*) is a spiritual (*ruhani*) thing, you have no gauge for it, nothing. How will you measure it? But the reality is that your body is filtered, completely clean and transparent. And we are completely separate from others, from the non-*Sulaymani*, just as one thing is separate from another, in the same way, we are completely separate. Now, when you are so pure and clean, and you are on a path, and you are on the path of purity (*taharat*), on the path of correctness (*durusti*), you are on the path of paradise (*Jannat*), and you are one who will attain salvation (*najat*)—despite all this, you take your body, which is filtered, which has come to you clean and pure, the body which is carrying your self (*nafs*), and you, disregarding this *nafs*, neither caring for it nor for its body, you use a wrong thing.

So what will happen? Suppose you are restless. I ask, "Sir, why are you restless?" You say, "What can I do, sir? I have a stone (*pathri*) in my kidney, and it's causing me pain." How did this stone form? Your body is all transparent, your body is pure and clean. How did this stone come to be? How did this rock get there? So it means that within your body, in this whole world, the arrival of this stone, the arrival of this foreign object, is making you what? You have become restless. And why are you restless? Well, it has shown its signs: you have started to feel pain, it has started to appear on the X-ray, you have started to feel its effects, and you have started trying to get rid of that stone as soon as possible, so that the pain subsides, the illness subsides, and everything is removed from you. Because you want the illness to go away, for the stone to go away, don't you? So just as a stone enters your body and troubles you, and you try to get rid of it, in the same way, imagine that our gathering is assembled, and you are all listening. And now, suddenly someone from the common folk (*awam*) loudly shouts and comes and sits down. So what will happen? What will happen? What will you do? Everyone's attention will turn from me towards him. Everyone will start looking at him. Why has this person come now? Who is this person? For what purpose has he come? You will naturally try to get a sense of him, and you will become worried. You will be worried because you will see: who is this stranger that has come into my own gathering? Who is this stranger in my gathering? That is why you are looking at him.

So, in the very same way, if you have taken this impure thing, that alcohol, then your whole body is pure. And you are thinking, "What does it matter about my body? What's the point of it being pure or impure? Whatever happens, happens." It is not a question of understanding or not understanding; what is, is the reality. Your body is pure, it is filtered, it is clean, you are a believer (*mo'min*), from the progeny of believers, you are everything. But what did you do? At the instigation of your *nafs*, to please it, you went and drank alcohol. So what will happen? The moment you gulp it down, the first sip will be staggering. And your conscience (*conscious*) will start to bite you, first of all. And you will feel that you have not done a good thing. You have done a very bad thing. First, it will stop you beforehand, and if not, it will try to stop you on the first sip, and will say, "Look, you are not doing a good thing, you are doing a very wrong thing." But what did you do? You started to put a lid on it. "Be quiet, I will drink. Who is to say anything?" So what will happen? The voice of the conscience (*zamir*) will start to die down, and your voice will rise, and you will keep drinking. Now what will happen? What happens due to drinking is that those who are... the alcohol is from the *Musirr* and *Mustakbir* (the insistent sinners and the arrogant), which is the final group. These are its parts (*ajza*).

You understand? This is the worst... our... the filth that there is, the putrefaction (*'ufunat*) that there is, what we describe as blood and pus (*khun-o-peep*), and what is called filth (*ghalazat*), this is a better thing compared to alcohol. You understand? It is only a matter of changing its form. You see a bad smell in this one, and you don't see a bad smell in that one, so you have given it that name. No, no, no. Now, if I tell you this same thing, if I show you a little magic trick, you extract the juice of grapes. After extracting the grape juice, what do you call it? You say, "This is *Asl-un-nab* (the essence of the grape)." This is grape juice for you. Drink it. It's a good thing, sir. Drink grape juice, what objection do we have? We have no objection, no one stops you. After that, what happens? Slowly, sourness starts to develop in it, and intoxication (*sukr*) is created in it, which is called... toxins... are there, and naturally, a state of intoxication (*nasha*) is created, and that very thing becomes wine. And that very thing, you forbid. And if, suppose, you bury this same wine and keep it for 15-20 days, then this becomes vinegar (*sirka*).

Did you see? The same thing changes its forms. So do not be deceived by this, about what the thing is. When a thing comes before you in a certain form, you must accept it in that very form. Then you have to apply the ruling (*hukm*) on it, that this thing is permissible (*halal*), this thing is forbidden (*haram*). And you are not the one to go into its depths, about what it will become or what it will not become. These are matters of your heart. When a thing of intoxication comes before you, you should kick it away. If sherbet comes before you, you should take it. What is the command, is the command. Why do you try to go into its depths? So what I am saying is, how things come before you, changing their forms. So you cannot guess. How do they wear their clothes (*libas*)? You cannot guess how many faces there are. And they look very noble (*sharif*), but they are thieves and bandits. And so many are bandits, they look exactly like bandits, but they are extremely noble. It happens, doesn't it? So then you cannot guess from the face. The index of mind does not exist.

Understood? This idiom (*muhawara*) has just become popular, but it's not like that. So, in the same way, what happens is that when you take such an utterly vile thing, which is the thing of the *Musirr* and *Mustakbir*, you are a believer. You are here, and the *Musirr* and *Mustakbir* are there. You take its thing and start pouring it into your body, so what will happen now? A war (*jang*) will begin among the parts of your body. And the name of the war is that your... the voice that starts coming from your conscious, that is called a war. That war will begin. And how long will this war last? Until you either accept it, or you beat it into submission. You suppress the voice of your conscience, so suppress it. You suppressed it. Alright, now what happened? The poor thing is no longer capable of speaking. It's finished. Now it's finished. On the first day, the second day, it kept speaking. On the third day it spoke, you did something, it happened, and now its voice has been suppressed. Now it neither listens to the voice of this side nor that side, nor does it listen to anyone's voice. Now what has happened? You have started to increase it. Now what is it? The moment it came, every person wants... *kunad ba-ham jins, jins ba-ham jins parwaz* (a Persian proverb: birds of a feather flock together). Everything is inclined towards its own kind. *Kullu shay'in yarji'u ila aslih* (everything returns to its origin). Birds of a feather flock together. In the very same way, what will happen? The parts (*ajza*) will attract the parts. You are a believer, and this is the thing of a disbeliever. Now, after the disbeliever's things have come, what will they do? They will come and feel that this whole world is strange, I have come and gotten stuck here. They will feel like a complete stranger. So just as you go to a gathering and feel a bit troubled, thinking, "There is no one like me here," you look for a peer (*hamjoli*) or a friend (*hamdost*) to pass the time well. "What kind of place have I gotten stuck in?" In the very same way, that alcohol, after entering your body, now starts looking for a way. Now what does it do? When it sees that it has come and sat in a very wrong gathering, and these are all pure and holy people and so on, and I have come into a believer, and since that is a thing of Satan, and Satan knows how to mislead, what does it do? It starts a double action. Now look here, there is a lot of delicacy, try to understand. The very first effort of that alcohol is that its quantity should keep increasing. You keep pouring, so the alcohol will keep increasing. Now you will become alcohol, and you will leave yourself. You are being expelled from faith, you are losing the parts of faith, and what are you becoming? A complete pile of filth. So what has happened? Since the quantity of filth has increased, how will it be able to listen to anyone? It will not listen to anyone. This was a one-sided matter. Now the two-sided matter. What is the two-sided matter? It is that whose parts these are, of the *Musirr* and *Mustakbir*... that *Musirr* and *Mustakbir*, whoever it is, whichever person it is, that *Musirr* and *Mustakbir*, whose parts these are, its vile form (*surat-e-khabith*), which is roaming in this world, which I have told you all about, its places of residence, and its mounts, and where it goes and what mischief it creates, I have said all this, so such a form comes and takes possession. "Oh, this is the one who takes my parts! I will be a guest in his house." There you go. Now it has laid its bed at his place. After laying the bed, what will happen? Now the double action has started. One, the parts are pulling, and a vile form is also influencing him here. "Why do you only do this much? If you commit a theft, you will become a millionaire in one night, that would be good. Do that thing too, that would be good. Strangle that person and kill him, that would be good." Alright. Now, from one, countless things have started. And you have also seen what this alcohol does. First of all, it dulls the intellect (*'aql*). When the intellect is dulled, there is only darkness. Now, in the darkness, whether you commit fornication, you strangle someone, you kill someone, you misbehave with your mother, you misbehave with your wife, you misbehave with your sister, for you, everything is the same. So for whom the intellect itself is nullified, for him, everything is the same. Now if you say that the people of Europe do this, then there is some justification for them. If they do it, there is some small justification. What is that justification? They themselves are like that. They themselves are alcohol. If alcohol is poured into alcohol, there is nothing wrong with it, brother. It itself is of that kind. If wine is falling into wine, let it fall. If filth is mixing with filth, let it mix. Why should it not mix? Evil will join with evil. Since they themselves have cancer, why would cells from another cancer affect them? So the worst cause of cancer is alcohol. To this day, the world has not discovered this, but you, *Insha'Allah*, will see that it is the worst cause, the biggest cause is that. Cigarettes and so on are ordinary things. These are things of much later, this is the worst cause, which is alcohol. Now you will say, why doesn't alcohol affect them? It doesn't affect them because they themselves are alcohol. They are the parts of alcohol, so why won't alcohol affect them? Why would it affect them? They are drinking what they are made of, they are drinking their own thing. You are drinking it, so the trouble is coming to you. That is why the *Shari'at* has forbidden it.

So, did you understand the matter? Now, in the same way, take lying. Lying is... what is it... it is a precautionary worship (*ehtiyati 'ibadat*). It is such a thing that where speaking the truth is a good worship, this is the opposite thing. And you know that *al-fitnatu ashaddu min al-qatl* (and *fitnah* is worse than killing). Allah Ta'ala says that a lie, which Allah Ta'ala calls *fitnah*, he called a lie *fitnah*. What is *fitnah*? You light a match and walk away. There you have strife and chaos. A piece of meat was thrown into the mosque, and then they went out and fought like the Rohillas, and there was chaos, and 50-25 died here, and 25 died there. So this chaos starts. This is *fitnah*. So what is *fitnah*? It is a lie. The thing at its root is the lie. And from the lie, this whole chaos spreads. So Allah Ta'ala disliked the lie so much, disliked it so much, that you see, in only one place in the entire Qur'an-e-Majid, he curses (*kosna*). Which they say is to curse, to wail, that Allah may strike him, may finish him, may do this to him, what they curse, it is only in one place in the Qur'an-e-Majid that Allah Ta'ala has cursed, He Himself has cursed. And what is that for? For the lie. *Qatalahumu-Llahu anna yu'fakun* (May Allah destroy them; how are they deluded?). *Parvardigar* (Sustainer), strike these people, these liars. See, God Himself is saying this. You understand? That Allah Ta'ala is saying, "May God strike the liars." So it means what a bad thing it must be that God is cursing it. So this is the most... and then at another place he says, *la'natu-Llah 'ala-l-kadhibin* (the curse of Allah be upon the liars). God sends his curse on those people who lie. So it means, what is the meaning of curse? Distance from mercy (*rahmat*). He has distanced them from mercy.

So it was understood that this is all a most vile thing. And in the same way, what is it? That... the third I mentioned was *zina* (adultery). In it is the protection of lineage (*nasl*). If your lineage is not protected, then nothing is protected. There is a big difference between a legitimately born person (*halal-zada*) and an illegitimately born one (*haram-zada*). So for the protection of lineage, Allah Ta'ala made this arrangement. And he made this forbidden (*haram*). And for it, He created the form of permissible (*jayiz*) marriage (*nikah*) for you. It's not that He didn't make a provision (*jawaz*) for you. He absolutely made a provision. And look, we impose restrictions, Allah has not imposed restrictions. If you look closely at the laws of Islam, Allah has given a lot of liberty, a lot of freedom. We have imposed the restrictions. Our society (*samaj*) has imposed them. Otherwise, our restrictions would not come like this, and I do not want to go into those matters, you understand those things. You understand those things. What kinds of difficulties a person faces, and for marriage and so on, what compulsions there are. But despite those compulsions, one is so bound by society that you cannot marry a second time. But did the Shari'at stop you? It did not stop you.

So in short, these are all the worst sins. After that, what is there? After that is murder (*qatl*). Is taking someone's life a small matter? No, it is the worst sin. *Man 'tala mo'minan muta'ammidan fa-jaza'uhu Jahannam* (And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell). Whoever took a believer's life, and took it intentionally (*ta'ammud*), his punishment is Hell. Now he will have to go to Hell. So these are the worst sins. That is why it is forbidden. That is why it is forbidden. These are a few things that can be explained to you. Besides these, there are others too. But unfortunately, those things have a lot of subtleties and depths, which our minds cannot bear. We have to leave those things. But when the Divine, and the lawgiver of the *Shari'at* forbid something, the Lord of the worlds has kept all things. And I am telling you that these are channels, which are various channels running in the world. And you see plants, you see animals, you see humans, but among these humans, there are many kinds of humans. Among these animals, there are many kinds of animals. Among these plants, there are many kinds of plants. Among these minerals, there are many kinds of minerals. You will say, "Many kinds of minerals?" Meaning gold, silver, iron, brass, copper, all this. And in plants, like this is a neem tree, that is a whatever tree, this tree, that tree. No, sir, I am not saying that. I am saying that among them there will be the regretful (*nadimin*), there will be the grateful (*shakirin*), there will be the *musirr* and *mustakbir*. In every single species, in every kind, there will be every single thing. But the command that the *Shari'at* is giving you, what command is it giving? That you should eat what is permissible (*halal*). Wear what is permissible, eat what is permissible, look at what is permissible, do what is permissible. Do not go from the permissible to the forbidden, otherwise if you go, you will be trapped.

And the matter will become clearer when I bring the topic of Laylat al-Qadr and fate before you, and when I bring the matter of *'ismah* (infallibility) and try to explain the matter of *'ismah* to you, then you will realize what Laylat al-Qadr is, what fate is, and what its details are. With great detail, *insha'Allah*, tomorrow or the day after, that topic will come up, and you all, with great detail, will listen to it.

So anyway, what I had to say was that you are seeing that for these reasons, it has been declared a major sin (*gunah-e-kabira*). Understood? And in a certain sense, the Commander of the Faithful (*Amir al-Mo'minin*) said this, that he is committing a big sin in my view. He also said this. The one who gives false testimony, he is committing a big sin. The one who consumes the property of an orphan. So if the Prophet, the Commander of the Faithful, was saying this, he was saying it with great depth. But you have said this about the major sins in such a way as if a big... to magnify it and to tell it. But the major sins that have been specified are these five. So these are also big sins, which we have to avoid, and after that, we have to suffer its consequences. That is why it is forbidden.

Now, I told you this: that if, God forbid, God forbid, a believer commits such sins, and he commits such sins, then what happens? For him... they pray this prayer (*du'a*), that if on the 17th, 21st, and 19th nights he goes and, by God's grace, if he gets the 23rd night, Shab-e-Qadr, then what can be said! And on these nights, there are great events (*qiyamatein*) hidden. And if he gets these nights, and he repents (*tawbah tillah*), and he turns back (*ruju'*) to the court of Allah, then the Lord of the worlds, He is Ghafur-ur-Rahim (the All-Forgiving, the Most Merciful), He is the one who listens. He is the one who accepts repentance. Despite him having committed such a major sin, forgiveness can happen. But forgiveness will not happen just by you crying. First of all is sincere repentance (*tawbah-tan-nasuh*), that "I will not do this again." One. The second thing is that you should perform atonement (*kaffara*), and what the Qur'an has said, *shahrayni mutatabi'ayn* (two consecutive months [of fasting]), one should fast for two months as a minimum atonement, *mutatabi'ayn*, not a single day should be missed. Continuously fasting for two months. You might say, "I'll include Ramadan Sharif in it." No, it's not like that. You have to do two months, so do two months separately. And do it continuously. Then you do one month and then you look for the winter season... no, it's not like that. You have to do it consecutively. So, and this too, it has been told to us because this is a mercy from the elders. It is a mercy from the elders. Otherwise, what is it? The prescribed punishment (*hadd*) is carried out. One is whipped, a hand is cut off, they are... the *hadd* is carried out on them. But since the Imam is not manifest, and the *hadd* is not being carried out, and if a believer commits such a wrong, then if he repents like this and performs atonement with these things, gives his atonement, and that wealth... *lan tanalu-l-birra hatta tunfiqu mimma tuhibbun* (Never will you attain the good reward until you spend in the way of Allah from that which you love). Spend that wealth in the way of Allah which is most beloved (*mahbub*) to you. Which you think is going to come with you to your grave. It's not going to come. So spend that wealth, where your heart aches a little. It should be such that when you take out that money, your heart aches. Until you take it out, it won't work. So you take out that thing too, and give it in the way of Allah. Spend it in the way of Allah. So after doing all these things, then Allah, the one who seeks forgiveness, He accepts his forgiveness. And only Allah knows, because these sins are not forgiven just like that, but He knows and Allah knows, because He is Ghafur-ur-Rahim, and He is the acceptor of repentance. He accepts his repentance.

This is what happens. But what happens if, suppose, someone did not repent, and did not seek his forgiveness, neither fasted, nor did this, nor did that, and in this world, just like that, eating, drinking, wandering around... in this way, he finished and died, and left the world, then what will be his state? His body will be, just as is the case with the disbelievers and polytheists, taken to the gates of hell. In the same way, trouble will come upon the believer too. And the believer will also have to go through two stages. What are they called? The first is called *Rajs*, and the second is called *Waqs*. *Waqs*. *Rajs* is what? It is the station (*daraka*) of the Abyssinians (*Habshis*), in which there are Sudanese, they are black, they are Abyssinians, whose faces are vile, and their forms are extremely detestable (*makruh*). That we feel revulsion at their faces. You might say, "No, no, brother, brotherhood." Hey, get rid of all this brotherhood. This is wrong, this brotherhood. Understood? If there is revulsion, then say there is. Their form has been transformed (*maskh*). Allah Ta'ala says, "We have transformed their faces." We have made their faces ugly. So you must call the ugly, ugly. Otherwise, if you don't call the ugly, ugly, then who will call the good, good? If you turn your back on the qibla, then your back will be towards God, it has to be.

So these, these Abyssinians, all of them who are... but you should understand this, that all of them are Abyssinians, all of them have become like that... it is not like that. *Illa ma sha' Allah* (except as Allah wills), some of them are... they go with the prophets. Bilal-e-Habashi was the *mo'azzin* of the Prophet, he was also an Abyssinian after all. But this does not mean that the law is broken. The law is in its place, the exception is in its place. So in the same way, but don't just go by color. Look at the Turks, they are of a fair color, but they also come into this trouble. And they too are in this first station. They abandoned the *da'wah*, that is why they became Turks. And they also come in this category, and that is why slavery came upon them. That is why they were imprisoned. That is why they were beaten and killed, and how they were kept in the form of animals. History is present, and they were treated like animals, and they deserved this treatment. They deserved this treatment. Otherwise, this would not have happened. And for slavery to come into Islam... God forbid, God forbid, was the Prophet establishing the institution of slavery? No, it was not like that at all. It was never like that, that there was slavery. Then why did the rules of slavery come? Why did the conditions of slavery come? Why did the laws of slavery come into the *Shari'at*? So is there slavery in Islam, God forbid? Is it permissible in Islam to enslave someone? No, it's not like that. Even today, at our Sayyidna's place, there are slaves, and despite being freed, they have remained as slaves, saying, "We will remain your slaves." Okay, brother. But was this slavery, which was prevalent, how did it... in the *Shari'at*, why did its regulations come? When this door itself is being closed, this chapter itself is being closed, our ears also feel the ugliness of the word "slavery." So how did slavery come into Islam? I will tell you that. It came like this, that if, suppose, you want to build a dam on a river. You want to build a dam. So what will you do? It's a river, it's flowing. Now you want to build a dam on it, so what will you do? How will you build it? Tell me. You will bring great engineers, you will do whatever. You will have to do this, that whenever you put cement bags there, or whatever you do, you build wells, and you try to build a bridge, and after that you build a dam, so whenever the dam is built, whenever the water is stopped, a wall will rise. So what will happen? When the wall rises, some water will remain here. You cannot stop all the water. You will raise the wall in the middle. So some water has remained. Now the water that has remained, what will you do with it? What will you think? "We have built the wall, and the water that is left will dry up." It will dry up. In the very same way, Islam, the laws it made, it made them so that in the future, slavery would not arise. And the slavery that had already come into Islam, that slavery that had come into Islam, would slowly be eliminated through these very laws. You understand?

What was the matter? That in Islam, slavery had come. Before Islam, there were slaves, and there were many ways of slavery, master and slave... there are so many stories. And this was going on. This slavery and master-slave relationship that was going on in Islam, the Prophet wanted to stop this thing, but how could he stop it? You were seeing that someone was becoming a Muslim, so even after that, there were slaves with him. Even after that, there were masters. After that, a slave would come to you to accept Islam. A master would come to accept Islam. Now all this commotion was happening. What would you do? You, by imposing a restriction at once, did not say that... if, suppose, you had imposed the restriction right there, then neither the slave would have come to become a Muslim, nor the master would have come to become a Muslim. So what did you do? You said, "Look, people, after becoming Muslims, the good thing for you to do is, the most virtuous deed is that the wrongs you have committed before, to atone for them, to pay their penance, free a slave." Free them. To free a neck, which is called freeing a neck, this is the greatest reward. Just as in our time it is considered that animal sacrifice is the best charity, and it is, in the same way, freeing a neck is a great deed. And you all understand that what is the meaning of the goat sacrifice? You understand now. Now that form has to be released. The vile form that is riding on it has to be released. You understand now. So in the same way, you have to understand that this, freeing the slaves, this command was given by the Prophet. Now, slowly they started freeing the slaves. Do this atonement, so free a slave. Do that, so... atonement. So the Prophet prescribed such atonements in which slaves would be freed. When they were freed, what happened? Slavery started to be eliminated. So in this way, the noble Prophet, slowly, with ease, eliminated slavery. If he had gone to eliminate it at once, neither would they have accepted Islam, nor would they have been freed from slavery. So in this way, who freed from slavery? The Prophet, peace be upon him. These were the reformers. This is how he reformed. Did you see? How slowly he freed from slavery.

And and even today, what do we have? The prayers that we recite, that "O Allah, free our necks," and so on. So these words, why have they come? From that very context of freeing, these words have come to us. So, this slavery was like this, and on it... So it was learned that the first station (*daraka*), there Allah Ta'ala had decreed it on them. It was as a punishment that they are like animals, even though they look like humans. They are in the first station of Hell. They have come to the first level. Now, for the sake of punishment, if you take someone and put them in a punishment room, then you cannot say to him, "Now you will be treated like a free man." Hey, you have been put in the punishment room, you will receive punishment. Now you are not going to get bread and lentils. So it is clear that it is a punishment. So to be in the punishment and to escape the punishment makes no sense. So it is clear that God has imposed it on them. How? Slavery came. Slavery came. And it came there. Why? Why didn't it come to any other nation in the world? It didn't come for this very reason, that God did not want it.

So God did this, and in it too, as I said, there are 70 levels, and in every level, there is a... 70, 70 garments. 70 are the links. Meaning, if he went to one tribe, then there, 70 times he has to die and wear a different garment each time, and in a different capacity, he has to endure that punishment and die. And then wear a second link. Go to the second level. Then go to the third level. And in every level, 70, 70 times. You understand? In this way, he has to traverse 70 levels, wearing 70, 70 links. This is the punishment. And when he comes out of this punishment, then what happens? The second station begins, which is called what? *Waqs*. And what is *waqs*? Bear and monkey. These are the only two animals that God has placed in the second station. And that is why I told you that this is... this was the descending ladder, which Darwin counted as the ascending ladder. Otherwise, his theory is not wrong in its place. It certainly contains some truth, and that is because of this. That he, the skulls he collected and saw, and the various things he tried to connect, the reason for that was this very thing. That it is descending. That from the human form... that is why it is said, "We made them apes and swine." This, which Allah Ta'ala has said in the Qur'an Sharif, this was the punishment. And when they suffer this punishment, then as I told you, this punishment is suffered by those people, especially, these two stations, which believers also have to go through, if they commit such a major sin. And you see, what is that? This monkey and bear are the biggest drinkers of alcohol. They are extremely fond of alcohol. This is their... this is their most desired thing, which is alcohol. And their most desired thing is the act of procreation. And you will see that they are... the thing that they desired, that very thing God makes them do. And they keep doing it, and always... meaning the condition is such that it is a state of itching, that you get fed up, but you keep scratching. That is their condition. God says, "The thing in which you took pleasure, and the thing you liked, now stay in that, and that is your punishment." And God gives that punishment. And for how long does he give that punishment? Until he... 70 levels, and in 70 levels, in every level, 70, 70 links, he wears. In every single thing. Meaning, in every family of monkeys, there is a chimpanzee, there is a langur, there is this, there is that, in every thing he is coming, so 70, 70 times he has to change his garment. And he has to traverse all this. When he has traversed it completely, then they bring him where? To the reverse (*aks*). *Aks* means to be the opposite. Meaning, now he was in the human form, he was in the perfect form. Now he was tall, now his gaze was towards the sky. He was a human and was walking tall. Now what is the condition? Now you have bent down, you have become an animal. And what kind of animal have you become? You have become an animal with claws and paws. The ones that eat flesh and whose teeth are bloody, like lions, tigers, leopards... these all, the beasts of prey, which are the predators, he is taken to the form of these predators, and there, as I said, that the vile forms ride on many things, and they ride on these... on these garments... and in these forms. And as I had said, that in the fortress of the lover, there are three fortresses, and in them, one fortress is to trap the vile souls in animals. So I am telling you, that these vile souls are trapped in such a way that there is no need to go into the details of those animals before you, you yourselves understand how many details there are. What kinds of animals are there. Whether they are marine or terrestrial. But they are animals, and they are extremely destructive animals. With claws and paws. In the Shari'at, their definition is, whose teeth are sharp and whose paws are for striking, they are called these. These are the beasts of prey, these are the predators. They are brought into the predators, and in them too, 70 links, 70 levels, and in every level, 70 links have to be worn. Now, what is here? The believer is not brought here. If the believer is punished, then just as he is punished with some slaps and some punches, he is released. This is the mercy of Allah, that the believer, even if he has committed the worst sin, he is taken through these two stations and released. God releases him. And if he repents, then He is the Merciful and Forgiving. He is Forgiving. He is the one who forgives. But until the last breath, he must ask for forgiveness. And if he did not ask, then after death, that valley is there, it is there. It is for everyone. As is Allah, so is one.

So it was understood that these are all things. So now this third station, who is it for? It is for the polytheists, for the disbelievers, for the apostates, for the enemies, for... for all these things, for those who do disbelief. Whoever is of a non-believing religion, they are taken to the third station, and they come in the form of animals and predators. And they have to wear 70, 70 links in all those stations and levels. Which are called 70 garments. And after wearing 70 garments, when they have traversed this third level as well... *rajs* and *waqs* happened, and *aks* happened. Now what is it? Now *kharsh* came. *Kharsh* came. *Kharsh* means what in Arabic? It means a mute person. Now this muteness came. It means, now those animals could make sounds. Those animals could make some sounds, they could speak, some other sound would come out. But now that voice has been snatched from them by God. That voice has been snatched, and what has been done to them? Now it is said to them, "Go into a worse state than this, and now you crawl on your belly." They were made crawling creatures of the earth. They were made snakes, they were made scorpions, and various kinds of animals were made, as you know well, that they have to crawl on their belly. Now, instead of four-legged, they have a thousand legs. Instead of two, they have many hands. In this way, their number has been increased so that they come into the worst state of preoccupation and remain in the worst state. So this... after the predators, whose level is worse? That of the crawling creatures of the earth. They come into the crawling creatures of the earth, and in that, they have 70 levels, and in every level, they have to wear 70 links. After wearing 70 garments, when they come out of this, from the *kharsh*, then they reach where? To *raqs*. They come to *raqs*. *Raqs* is what? Now, what is this *raqs*? Now this *raqs* is a strange thing. This is the form of birds. You will say, "Then birds are better than the crawling creatures of the earth." This is the beauty of it, that what you are seeing as better, they are worse than that. Did you see? This, after the crawling creatures of the earth, if God has placed them, then they are worse than that. But why do you like these feathers? The feathers of these crows and pigeons you like, they are very colorful, the parrots are good, they talk like humans, and so on. Why is this? Hey, those are their good deeds. The good deeds they had done, as a reward for those good deeds, they are either given a beautiful skin, like a lion's. Just look at the lion's skin. Or the tiger's skin, look at it. Someone is being given skin, someone is being given a beak, someone is being given a voice. So these feathers are being given, these are their good deeds that God does not waste their good deeds either. The few good deeds they have done, take their fruit and go. Take it with you. These are the fruits they are getting. But He is bringing them in the form of birds. And all those kinds of birds, you are seeing, you know, and in those birds too, they have 70 levels, and 70 by 70 links they have to wear. These are the four stations that happened, of what? Of the animals. One station was of the humans. Five have happened. Now the sixth station is what? It is *naks*. *Naks* is what? It is the station of the plants. The plants. Now he comes into the plants. There is only one station for the plants. The plants, the peepal tree, the neem tree, the whatever tree, the champa-sheen, what you are thinking is a very beautiful plant, this cactus, its root is in Hell, and this is a branch of that tree. Its root is in Hell, and you are decorating the branch in your place, saying, "What a good thing it is." There you go. Give it water, and it will go to Hell. So those are things of Hell. But you are finding them beautiful. So what? Because you have drunk that thing, so the things that are not to be drunk, now you are seeing all things upside down. Understood? The thing that is straight, you don't bring that. "Hey, the rose flower is liked in the world, bring a rose." "No, I like the cactus." "Alright, brother, bring the cactus." You only like the thorny ones. So it has to be thorny. In reality... So it is clear that the... the bad thing becomes beautiful. Who says it doesn't? But you, for God's sake, don't keep it. When you hear that it is a bad thing, then why do you keep it? "No, no. My dining table will not be set, it will not be set without it. My house will not be set, it will not be set without it. The garden will not be set." One person is showing 102, another is showing 201. "Hey, what is it?" "It's the varieties." There you go. The varieties of cactus are increasing. Now what to do? And it's a matter of great pride. Even though they are hearing that it is a bad thing, a certain thing... but what to do, it is a matter of hobby. We were gardening, so this also came. This also came as gardening. That's a good thing. You have a liking for this, so you will go with the wicked. Do the gardening of the wicked. You will like them too. So, as the soul, so the angel. As is God, so are you. As is your intention, so is the fruit. You will say, "I am very... O Allah, I always used to remember You." You will do all the wrong things, you will bring such filthy things, you will keep that bottle in your house, which the world has considered worse than filth, and God has, and after bringing it, you will think that the mercy of Allah will descend, so from where will it descend? You, once a year, wash and clean your house, and you do a *niyaz* (offering), so you think that the cleaning for the whole year is done? No. It doesn't happen like that. Neither is it cleaned by *niyaz* nor by that. Your cleaning can happen by your devotion. You have to be devoted, and in the true sense, you have to worship God. You will not worship, you will bring such things and set them up, so you will fall into trouble. As is God, as you are, so is He.

So it was understood that this is *naks*. And the last thing is *raks*. *Raks* is what? Minerals. Now in minerals, there are all kinds of minerals, and in those minerals they will be taken, and what happened there? Sensation was also lost. Sensation was also snatched from it. In animals, at least there was sensation, that they could move, they could do things, they felt heat, they felt cold. So sensation went when he came into the plants, only growth remained. Only to grow remained. But there, growth has also ended, sensation has also gone. Now what is left? Now there is only stagnation. Remain in your place. So they have to remain, in the form of mountains, in the form of minerals, they are lying there. And winds are passing over them, days are passing over them, years are passing over them. But you see the state of the minerals. But they are there. They are in their place. So they have to go through these kinds of states, and they have to traverse the seventh station as well. So when they traverse the seventh station, then what happens? And in that station too, what will happen? 70 levels, and in every level, 70 kinds. We do not know. But God knows better, that how its levels are established, and how its garment changes in it. And they will slowly change their garments, and they will have to be transformed continuously. Somewhere, those rocks are being broken, somewhere they are being... melted. This burning and all this... you will say, "What's in the minerals? What's the feeling? Whether you melt it or what, or break it and make nails, what?" But we think like that. But doesn't science tell us today that the rotting and decaying of something is due to what? Why do things rot and decay? It is because every thing is revolving in its own orbit. Molecules are revolving around it. And when they leave their path, and they deviate from their orbit, then a crack appears there, and decay starts there. So it was understood that here too, where there is movement, there is an orbit, there is something. There is something in it. That which is inanimate, even though it is called inanimate, but in that inanimate thing too, there is something. Today science is accepting this. When science is accepting it, then how can you deny it? It speaks with observation.

So it was understood that these are all punishments, and punishments are bound to be received. And these seven levels, they have to traverse. And I told you that the people of faith, the Lord of the worlds has saved them, and they are not taken through these seven stations. But those who have committed such sins, which are major sins, they are taken through two stations, and there they are beaten and all that. And this too, not that they are made to wear 70 by 70 garments. This, as Allah Ta'ala wills, they are taken there, and after a little... after beating and thrashing them, they are brought back. As God wills, as He wants, He does. As many levels as He wants to take them to, and for as long as He wants to make them wear the garments, He makes them wear them, and then He brings them back after transforming them. And when they come, how do they come? They come like a blank slate. And for every change, there is one mill that Allah Ta'ala has set up. There is only one mill, and the name of that mill is *Mizaj Muntasir*. The name of that mill is *Mizaj Muntasir*. And what is this mill? This is the mill of the sky and the earth, which runs through the rains. These rains... what happens is that these... we, the minerals we have, the plants, the animals, which perish, which are finished, which burn, which die, which are finished, so what happens from their bodies? You will say, "Hey, fire into fire, water into water," these elements they merge into. This, we... but despite merging, what do they become? They accumulate and become clouds. These vapors become clouds, and after becoming clouds, what happens? They spread, and these, when they become heavy, they rain. They rain. Before you, it rained, but you know better what kind of rain this is. This rain... everything has thousands of things related to it, just as I said, in the same way, rain also has thousands of things. You are thinking that it rained in Kuwait, so it was a good rain. But who knows, God forbid, God forbid, this rain was to spread some epidemic. This rain was to spread an epidemic. What does that mean? That those vile forms were put into this form, and they were rained down, and what was the state? That such vapors and such diseases were created as a result. And or rains fell, but the fields became green. Rains fell, and buds sprouted. Rains fell, and grain was formed, and milk filled it, and it became food for you to eat. Rains fell, but the jungle was filled with only thorns. So you do not know from which rains where, but this, God arranges where it should be, when it should be, and how it should be, and what kind of rain it should be. This arrangement is with God. What is with you? You are thinking it rained, water fell. You only have one word. But with God, the arrangement is that the nature of the rain is different, the falling is different, the place is different, its specific property is different. The property of every water is different. So it was understood that when this water falls, then how many animals it is carrying, how many humans it is carrying, how many plants it is carrying, but they are not visible to you. Neither plants are visible, nor minerals are visible, nor animals are visible. But the... the water that fell, after falling, what happened? A bud sprouted from it. A plant grew from it. And a plant was eaten by some animal. And you slaughtered that animal with a knife and ate its meat. But what did you eat? You ate the animal. What did the animal eat? That grass. Where did the grass come from? From that rain. Where did the rain come from? From that cloud. When did the cloud form? From that vapor. Where did the vapor rise from? From that thing. Now this whole cycle, running, running, running, running, running, reached its beginning. And it was learned that after traversing all these stages, that thing had come there, and this thing, as food, came into you. So if the food has to be excreted as waste, it is excreted. If it has to become your blood, it becomes blood. If they are the parts of a believer, they become your body. And if, suppose, a thing has to be excreted after becoming bad, it is excreted. And if, suppose, that thing, after becoming the basis of a human, has to bring a person, then that same thing becomes the essence in your back, and after coming into the mother's womb, it is born, and a child is born. And you named him and all that. But you do not know from what darkness this child has come. From what places he has come. Has he come from a good place, has he come from a bad place, has he come after being beaten, has he come after being thrashed, what account has he brought, what account has he given? You know nothing. You are a mother, you are a father, you only know how to love. But what the reality is, only Allah knows best. That is why in our prayers there is a strange thing. Once, Mawlana Sayyidna Da'i Abd-al-Tayyib, may his soul be sanctified, he was teaching a book, and he was teaching the lesson, and he was sitting, and some people were coming to him to study. And at that time, his son, who was... he came from inside, he was a small child, and he came and started playing with your inkwell, and he spilled some ink, and some ink and so on fell. And you looked at him and said, "Hey, you are... I am teaching, and you are creating a mess." And you scolded him a little. And turning towards the people, you said to them, to those you were teaching, "Hey, look, this is my son, but what can I do? He has just come from stone and clay (*hajar-o-madar*)."

Did you understand? "He has just come from stone and clay." "Hey, he has just come out of the rocks." Did you see? He was the son of a Da'i. But you spoke of his origin. Why? The Da'i has that vision. "Fear the vision of the believer, for he sees with the light of Allah." This has been said. That, "Beware of the vision of the believer." The believer has the vision of the Day of Judgment. So when the believer has the vision of the Day of Judgment, then he is the Sultan-ul-Mo'minin (the Sultan of the Believers). These are the Du'at. Anyone who comes before them is x-rayed. His past and future, everything is in front of him. Everything is clear, where he started from, where he came from, what... what is his waste now, what he did, what he is, everything is... the whole thing is an x-ray. If the Da'i's vision doesn't work, then what will work? If his vision doesn't work, then... The Imam's deputy, he is a friend of God (*wali-e-khuda*). If he doesn't sit with all these perfections, then who will? Who will be called the authority in the world? It is his authority. So he immediately understood. So you, without caring for the child, you said, "He has come from stone and clay." So you explained that at his origin... that he has just come out of the earth and the rocks. What to do, brother? He doesn't have the sense yet.

So this was the state. Once, Sayyidna Sulayman, may his soul be sanctified, was teaching. Your miracles are countless, and what can be said of Sayyidna Humam! Who is called the Hujjat-ud-Du'at al-Hind was-Sind wal-Yaman (the Proof of the Du'at of India, Sindh, and Yemen). Who is called the essence of the Du'at of India, Sindh, and Yemen. That is Sayyidna Sulayman. And his miracles, which are given the least importance among us, that which is given the least importance, in reality, your thing is your scholarly perfections. It is your knowledge that you filled and made to overflow, which you threw away. That is the table spread (*ma'idah*) on which you showered your charities (*khayrat*). So those were the charities of knowledge. But the miracles he showed, he had to show them to the simple-minded, and after showing them, he left. And they are also about a thousand, which Sayyidna Ali has written in the Basatin-e-Sulaymaniyyah. And in that Sulaymani Basatin, the miracles he has written, are strange miracles. One miracle is particularly worth listening to, although there is great depth in it, and some... such a matter comes, but I will go on speaking. Because there is no need to understand everything, because I have also told you about the major sins. It so happened that you were holding a class. A class at Sayyidna Sulayman's place. The Day of Judgment itself, and a class means it will be the Day of Judgment. You should see the personality, who? Sayyidna Sulayman. And Sayyidna Sulayman is giving a lesson. And Sayyidna Sulayman, when he sat down to give the lesson, and started giving the lesson, and the one taking the lesson is taking the lesson, and he is reading. And while reading the book, a sentence came, and that writer, the Da'i, had written it, because he had no choice but to write it. He wrote that the Du'at are those whose gazes are deep. Hey, they are far-reaching. *Basaruka-l-yawma hadid* (Your vision, this Day, is sharp). Their gazes become very sharp on that day, the Day of Judgment. This happens to us at the time of death. But for them, their gazes are always sharp. They see with great depth. So when they... they explained that when these Du'at have such a deep gaze, that they know the future and the past, everything, when they want to know. When they want to know, nothing is hidden. Where he came from, when he came, what happened, what didn't happen, everything's... the whole record is in front of them. The whole record comes in front of them.

So this passed in the book. After it passed, Sayyidna Sulayman, since it was his own mention, he quickly passed over it, and he, reading on, closed the book. You said, "Did you understand? Such and such is the matter, so and so..." Finished. In this way, you made the matter very light and finished it. Now when it was finished, the one who was reading, he read and left. He took the book under his arm and left. Now after he left, the noble Hudud who were sitting listening, they were the listeners, he was the reader. And the poor reader was some young man, or someone, he came and read. Now these noble Hudud who were there, they placed their hands on the feet of Sayyidna Sulayman. And they said, "Mawla, you mentioned in it... but if you would explain it a little, that the Da'i's gaze, how does it work? And how do they come to know that what will happen, what will not happen? These future events are also known. So it is clear that how does this... happen? What is it? We are asking you for our own knowledge." Since they were the high-ranking Hudud, and they were sincere in the *da'wah*, Sayyidna Sulayman listened to them. And he said, "Look, it happens, it's not a big deal. But why do you ask for no reason?" They said, "No, Mawla, please tell us something. Our heart desires that you tell us something, so we may understand." Then, at that time, Sayyidna Humam said, "About whom do you want to ask? Ask. Whatever you ask, I will tell you. Tell me about some person." So they said, "Mawla, do this, tell us about that reader." So he immediately asked the question. The Hudud who were sitting there, he had already left. "Tell us about this reader, what is going to be his state? Where did he come from, and what will happen now?" So you explained that this reader is a seeker of knowledge, and he wants to acquire knowledge, and he has come to us to study, and he is studying the *raqa'iq* (subtleties), and he is reading its book. But the circumstances of this person seem very bad to me. And he is deteriorating so quickly, deteriorating so quickly, that slowly, as the deterioration happens, the situation will come that he will become a confirmed fornicator (*zinakar*). And he will commit fornication with 33 women. Did you see? Just look at the number. He will commit fornication with 33 women, and he will... among them, so many will be married women, and so many will be unmarried women. And at such and such a place, their husbands will catch him, and at such and such a tree, and at such and such a place, at such and such a tree, he will be beaten. And such, such... those words cannot be spoken, but his condition will be made so vile, and he will be burned. He will be killed, and he will be burned. They said, "Mawla, what a tragedy!" They put their hands on their heads and stood up. And they said, "Mawla, you are giving him this book?" So he said, "Brother, how can I hold back my grace, when Allah does not hold back His grace. Allah does not stop His grace, He does not stop sustenance (*rizq*), He does not stop food, He does not stop drink. And His... no matter how vile a person may be, He is giving him sustenance. So how can I be the one to stop him? I cannot stop him. I will give. Because I am seeing that he has come to acquire a good thing, so I will give. I will give. But I... so they said, "When you know that he is going to do such things, why do you give it?" So you said this very thing, that how can I stop the hand of my grace? At this moment, he is like this. If, suppose, since this is the world of free will, and if he uses this world of free will to become good, then why should I be accursed for no reason? Why should I be bad? It is possible. He can use his free will to become good. But I am seeing that he is going to do these things.

Did you see? This is the gaze. And after that, Sayyidna Ali writes that, by God, I was present in that lesson, and the words of Sayyidna Humam turned out to be absolutely true, that that person did exactly as you had said, and his end was the same, that at such and such a place, by such and such a tree, you wrote the name of that place in Ahmedabad. At that place, by that tree, he was hanged, and he was burned. Did you see? So the hand of grace, when God does not stop it, then we also do not stop the hand of grace. The *da'wah* never stops the hand of grace. But the one who is going to become bad, will become bad. The one who is going to become good, will become good. The flower will spread its fragrance. But the hornet will take its nectar, but poison will be made from it. And the honeybee will take it, and honey will be made from it. It is the fragrance of the same flower. But there, in the hornet, it becomes poison. So that is why Ali said that if I were to cut my believer's nose, he would still love me. And if, the one who is my enemy, if I were to give him all the wealth of the world, he would remain my enemy. Enmity and hatred would remain in his heart. Did you see? This is the vileness of man. And the enmity of man. That the world of enmity and hatred, that is established, will remain established. No matter how much you try to explain. Why? Because he has associated with the *Musirr* and *Mustakbir*. He has given his face to the *Musirr* and *Mustakbir*. He has made friends with them. He has loved them. So it is clear that his state will be like theirs. He will become like them. If you have gone towards goodness, you will become good.

And it will become clearer when I bring the matter of fate and destiny before you, that this... especially, the laws of the *Shari'at*, how they are decreed upon us, and what are the reasons for obeying them. These are very deep matters, which come under the heading of fate. I, *insha'Allah*, will explain that. When that matter comes. For now, I am continuing my topic, that I have told you the levels and their stations, and along with the stations, I have told you about their 70, 70 garments. And this, the last station which was... which was called the *'azab-e-adna* (lesser punishment), I have told you that too. But after this, the *'azab-e-a'traf* (punishment of the heights) begins. What is the *'azab-e-a'traf*? Does Allah Ta'ala only want to give punishment? It is not like that. Why is there the *'azab-e-a'traf*? What is it? This explanation, *insha'Allah*, will be tomorrow.
