# The Dignity of Earning Your Bread

God Most High says:

> فانتشروا فى الارض وابتغوا من فضل الله

"Travel the earth and seek of God's bounty."

The Messenger of God said:

> التاجر الصدوق يحشر يوم القيمة مع الصديقين والشهداء

"The truthful merchant is raised on the Day of Resurrection with the truthful and the martyrs."

And he said:

> من طلب الرزق حلالاً وتعففاً عن المسئلة وسعياً على عياله وتعطفاً على جاره لقى الله ووجهه كالبدر

"Whoever seeks his provision lawfully, keeping himself from begging, striving for his dependants and showing kindness to his neighbour, will meet God with a face like the full moon."

And he said:

> اتقوا الله واجملوا فى الطلب

"Fear God, and be measured in seeking."

And he said:

> لإن يأخذ احدكم حبله فيحطب على ظهره خير من ان يأتى رجلاً اعطاه الله من فضله فيسأله اعطاه او منعه

"That one of you take his rope and carry firewood upon his back is better for him than that he come to a man whom God has given of His bounty and beg from him, whether that man gives him or refuses him."

It is related of him that he passed, during the expedition of Tabuk, by a strong young man driving his beasts and labouring hard. Those present said: "O Messenger of God, if only the strength of this man, his vigour and his soundness, were spent in the way of God, it would be better." The Messenger of God heard them and said: "What is this labour of yours, and for what do you toil at it?" The young man said: "I have a wife and dependants, and I earn by this labour, and I spend upon my dependants, and I keep them from having to ask of people, and I discharge a debt that lies upon me." He said: "Perhaps it is for other than that." The young man said: "No." And when he had turned away, the Messenger of God said: "If he is truthful, then he has a reward like the reward of the fighter, and the reward of the pilgrim, and the reward of the one who performs the lesser pilgrimage."

And he said: When a man's circumstances become straitened,

> فليخرج من بلده ويضرب فى الارض يبتغى من فضل الله ولا يغم نفسه واهله

"let him go out from his town and strike out into the earth seeking of God's bounty, and let him not bring grief upon himself and his household."

And it is related of him that he said, naming those whom God shelters in His shade on a day when there is no shade but His:

> رجل خرج ضاربا فى الارض يطلب من فضل الله ما يكف به نفسه ويعود به على عياله

"a man who went out striking into the earth, seeking of God's bounty what would suffice him and what he might return with to his dependants."

And he said:

> ان الله يحب العبد ان يكون سهل البيع وسهل الشراء وسهل القضاء وسهل الاقتضاء

"God loves the servant who is easy in selling, easy in buying, easy in settling what he owes, and easy in claiming what is owed to him."

Thus he described trade, and loved it, and counselled people to it, because in it lie much good and much blessing.

Once the Messenger of God passed by the traders, who in those days were called brokers, and he said to them:

> الا انى لا اسميكم السماسرة ولكنى اسميكم التجار والتاجر الفاجر فى النار

"I do not name you brokers; rather I name you merchants. And the merchant who deals falsely is in the Fire."

At this they shut their doors and held back from trading. The Messenger of God came out and said: "What is the matter with the people?" It was said: "O Messenger of God, they heard what you said yesterday, and they have held back." He said: "And I say it again today: unless a man takes what is rightfully his and gives what is rightfully due."

In this same sense a report has come of a man who said to the Commander of the Believers: "O Commander of the Believers, I wish to enter into trade." He said:

> افقهت فى دين الله

"Have you gained understanding in the religion of God?" The man said: "Something of that." He said: "Understanding first, then trade."

And he used to say:

> انى لابغض الرجل يكون كسولا فى امر دنياه لانه اذا كان كسلا فى امر دنياه فهو عن امر آخرته اكسل

"I dislike the man who is slothful in the affair of his world, for if he is slack in the affair of his world, he is slacker still in the affair of his Hereafter."

And among his sayings was:

> ما من غدوة احدكم فى سبيل الله باعظم من غدوته يطلب فيه لولده وعياله ما يصلح هم

"No morning setting-out of one of you in the way of God is greater than his setting-out to seek for his child and his dependants what will set them right."

It is related that a man asked Imam Jaʿfar ibn Muḥammad (ع) to call upon God to grant him provision, and to give him a supplication. He said:

> لا ادعو لك اطلب كما أمرت

"I will not supplicate for you. Seek, as you have been commanded." Then he said:

> ينبغى للمسلم ان يلتمس الرزق حتى يصيبه حر الشمس

"It befits the Muslim to seek his provision until the heat of the sun reaches him."

And he counselled one of his companions, saying:

> لا تكن دوارا فى الاسواق ولا تكن شراء دقايق الاشياء بنفسك فانه لا ينبغى لك ولا للمرء المسلم اهل الدين والحسب ان يشترى دقايق الاشياء بنفسه

"Do not be one who circles about in the markets, and do not be one who buys trifling things himself; for it does not befit you, nor does it befit the Muslim man of religion and standing, that he purchase trifling things himself."

And one day he looked at a man from among the companions carrying a bundle of greens in his hand, and he said:

> انه يكره للرجل السرى ان يحمل الشئ الدنى لئلا يجترىء عليه احد

"It is disliked for a man of honour to carry a lowly thing, lest anyone become emboldened against him."
