# The Persian Who Was Dead and Revived

As for the doctrines of the righteous and the manners of the seekers, we have heard that a man from the people of Persia (أهل فارس) was struck by the calamity of ignorance, though he possessed a heart of keen retention, a sound intellect, and a culture he had acquired. Yet ignorance prevailed over him with regard to the knowledge we have mentioned, for he had been born into it and grown up in that state. So he wavered in the heat of thirst, reckoning the glittering mirage to be the whiteness of water, until, when he came to it, he found it to be nothing, and he found Allah there before him, who settled his reckoning. Then He honored his resting-place and lifted from him his covering. He found him astray and guided him, and found him in want and enriched him with knowledge. So by that favor he became one of the scholars of Tur (الطور) and one of the dwellers of the Bayt al-Ma'mur (البيت المعمور).

When his guidance was complete and he had reached the utmost of his hope, it became incumbent upon him to give thanks to his Maker and to toil his way toward his Lord. Now he had heard a saying from his father, one that was to him as the soul is to the body: "The best of good deeds is to revive the dead" (إن أفضل الحسنات إحياء الأموات). So he said within himself: "I was dead and He revived me, ignorant and He taught me. I was not the first to be ignorant, that I should have outstripped all people to knowledge, nor am I the last who will be ignorant, that teaching should come to an end with me. It is truly binding upon me to be among those who give thanks for this blessing, delivering this trust to those who come after me just as it was delivered to me by those who came before. For this matter is, at its first, from Allah, and it reached me only through many intermediary causes, the first delivering it to the second, and the second to the third, until it descended from the highest assembly to the creatures who are the people of this world. Then it pierced the veil and the doors thrust it forward until it reached me. Am I, then, to be its terminus and its end? Never. Those who transmitted it and kept faith with the trust in it have the prior claim to the earnings and the merit; and if their earnings are not mine to lean upon, then I am rather the one gained for them by their labor. And if their bounty does not excuse me from labor, then I remain as poor in my need to seek knowledge through action as I was poor in my need to seek knowledge itself." He said this within himself, and he knew that what was required of him was the very like of what had been granted to him, and that the end of his affair, in the reckoning, was the same as its beginning.

So he departed from his family and his wealth, going out toward his Lord in answer to Him and calling toward the good, that there might become due to him a share of thanksgiving like the share that had become due from him. He set out to travel through the lands, passing among the peoples of the non-Arabs and the tribes of the Arabs, examining faces and putting questions to them, yet finding none who answered and meeting none who sought, until he came at last to the far reaches of the island (الجزيرة). He entered one of its cities at a moment when its people were heedless. And while he was recalling the signs of Allah and searching among the multitudes, he caught sight of a company of the people of that land quarreling over religion without guidance and plunging into the depths of caprice. So he sat down not far off, apart from them, listening to their speech and reading their faces to see which of them held to the soundest way.

He said within himself: "These are the ones most fit to be revived, for three qualities. The first is that the proof has reached them. The second is that they are of the people of a religion. And the third is that they are the nearer to right guidance, given their alertness toward religion, their joint attention to it, and their joint search after it; and one who seeks a thing is close to finding it."

When they had finished the talk they were engaged in, they turned to him and said: "Who are you, and from where are you, young man?"

He said: "I am a servant of Allah (عبد الله), and one of the dwellers of His sanctuary (حرم)."

They said: "Then what is your need, and what is your work?"
