# Remembrance as the Quintessence of Worship

The practice of the remembrance of God, dhikru'Llah, is best approached first through those Qur'anic verses that name it as a devotional discipline:

And invoke the Name of thy Lord morning and evening (76:25).

And invoke the Name of thy Lord, devoting thyself to Him [or: it] with utter devotion (73:8).

O ye who believe! Invoke God with much invocation (33:41).

Call upon thy Lord in humility and in secret (7:55).

And invoke thy Lord within thyself, in humility and awe, and beneath thy breath, in the morning and in the night (7:205).

All of these verses point to an actual practice, one to be maintained according to different modes: 'within thyself', 'in humility', 'in awe', 'in secret', 'beneath thy breath', and so on. Most importantly, the invocation is to be performed abundantly, dhikran kathiran. The intensity and duration of the devotions of the Prophet and the first Muslims are recalled in the Qur'anic chapter al-Muzzammil ('The Enwrapped'), which mentions the long night vigils these early Muslims maintained: 'Truly, thy Lord knoweth that thou standest in prayer for almost two-thirds of the night, and a half of it, and a third of it, as doth a group from those with thee' (73:20). The opening of this Sura contains the verse instructing the Prophet to 'remember/invoke the Name of thy Lord, and devote thyself to Him with utter devotion' (73:8). The pronoun in the word ilayhi, 'to Him', can refer either to Him as 'thy Lord' or to 'it' as the 'Name of thy Lord', so that the operative meaning of the verse becomes: 'Invoke the Name of God and devote yourself to this Name with utter devotion.' This recalls the explicit injunction, 'Glorify the Name of thy Lord, the Exalted' (87:1). On the plane of devotional practice, then, devotion to the Name of the Absolute is tantamount to devotion to the Absolute itself. The Absolute in itself is above and beyond all forms, including all verbal forms, yet it is nonetheless made accessible through the divine Name: a Name not defined by any human linguistic invention but bestowed through divine self-disclosure, God revealing the sacrament of His own Name. Distraction from the remembrance or invocation of the Name is, equally, distraction from God Himself, as two verses make clear: 'The devil hath overcome them, causing them to forget the remembrance of God' (58:19), and 'O ye who believe, let not your wealth nor your children distract you from the remembrance of God' (63:9).

This identification between devoting oneself to God and devoting oneself to His Name flows from a principle stated by Ali (ع) in a simple affirmation: 'He who loves a thing dedicates himself fervently to its invocation (man ahabba shay'an lahija bi-dhikrihi).' The lover of God should therefore devote himself utterly to the invocation of the Name of God, giving himself to it in abundance, kathiran. The pairing of lahija, meaning both 'to be devoted to' and 'to mention repeatedly', with dhikr, which indicates the constant verbal repetition of the invocation, also appears in the Du'a' Kumayl, there with an added explicit reference to the tongue: '... my tongue has devoted itself to thy invocation (lahija bihu lisanī min dhikrika).' He implores God, 'Make my times in the night and the day inhabited by Thy remembrance', and 'make my tongue invoke Thee with utter dedication (ij'al lisanī bi-dhikrika lahijan)'. The invocation as a practice is confirmed in his words: 'O He whose Name is a remedy and whose invocation is the cure (ya man ismuhu dawa' wa dhikruhu shafa').'

Here the Name of God is far more than a name among other names, a word or sound among other symbols: it is the remedy for man's congenital forgetfulness, the spiritual amnesia, ghafla, that has become his 'second nature'. But to be effective, the Name must be actively invoked rather than merely contemplated, just as a medicine must be taken and not merely thought about if it is to exercise its healing power. As the Imam puts it in one of his sermons, describing the greatness of the Qur'an: 'It has made the dhikr incumbent upon your tongues.' And the invocation is to be performed kathiran, much, in abundance. The following hadith of the Prophet makes clear that dhikr has an operative, practical dimension and cannot be reduced to a purely theoretical interpretation of its meanings:

'Abd Allah b. Busr reported that a man said, 'O Messenger of Allah, the laws of Islam are too many for me, so tell me something that I may cling to.' He replied, may God bless him and give him peace, 'Let your tongue never cease to be moist from invoking Allah.'

The verses that follow the Qur'anic exhortation to invoke much deserve quotation: 'O ye who believe, invoke God with much invocation, and glorify Him early and late. He it is who blesseth you, as do His angels, so that He may bring you forth from darkness into light; and He is ever merciful to the believers' (33:41-43).

The reciprocity here between the dhikr of the believers and the salat, the prayer or blessing of God, upon the believers deserves attention. The relationship between the human act of invocation and the divine act of blessing is more complex than it first appears. Exploring this relationship and the ontological dimensions of the invocation brings one close to the mystery expressed by the verse, 'Remember Me, I will remember you' (2:152).

Remaining with the verses cited above (33:41-43), the relationship to note is that between invocation and illumination, being brought from darkness into light. The Imam speaks of the way in which human invocation results in divine illumination, and his words may be read as a commentary on this dimension of those verses: 'Whoever invokes God, glorified be He, God enlivens his heart and illuminates his inner substance (lubb).' The word lubb (pl. albab) here evokes the Qur'anic verse describing the ulu'l-albab, the 'possessors of substance', in which the dhikr again figures prominently: 'Truly in the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the alternation between night and day, there are signs for those of substance, those who invoke God standing, sitting and reclining on their sides, and reflect upon the creation of the heavens and the earth ...' (3:190-191).

Beyond reinforcing the practical and methodic dimension of remembrance, this passage indicates the relationship between dhikr and fikr, between invocation and reflection or meditation. The practice of invocation is understood to polish the inmost organ of awareness, thereby deepening the capacity for meditation upon the 'signs of God' in creation and within oneself. When the element of love is placed between invocation and meditation, for 'he who loves a thing dedicates himself fervently to its invocation', these three elements enter a virtuous circle in which each strengthens and deepens the other two. The more seriously one ponders the 'signs' of God and appreciates their beauty, the more one comes to love God; the more one loves God, the more one invokes His Name; the more one invokes, the more keenly one perceives the sacred message of those 'signs' in the universe. Thus fikr intensifies dhikr, and dhikr deepens fikr.

These verses (3:190-191) also matter because they highlight the supra-formal dimension of invocation. The dhikr is presented here as the quintessence of all religious activity, the spiritual act par excellence. Its modes are universal: standing, sitting, reclining, as the verse states, and 'within thyself', 'in humility', 'in awe', 'in secret', 'beneath thy breath', as the verses cited above make clear. These modes transcend the formal rules governing the fixed canonical prayers, which prescribe specific words, movements, and conditions. The dhikr, by contrast, is to be performed at all times, in all places, and in all postures; it is something to be woven into the texture of everyday life rather than imposed upon life as an external, formalistic practice. According to Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, invocation is the one practice that should be carried out in all circumstances and at all times, with no limit placed upon it: 'Everything has a limit, at which it terminates, except the dhikr Allah. God has made obligatory the religious duties (al-fara'id), so whoever fulfils them, that fulfilment constitutes their limit. For the month of Ramadan, whoever fasts therein, that constitutes its limit ...' He goes on to mention other rites, then cites the Qur'anic verse: 'O ye who believe, invoke God with much invocation', and adds that his father, Imam Muhammad al-Baqir, never ceased invoking, even while eating and walking.

In this light it becomes easier to understand those whom the Qur'an describes as 'men whom neither trade nor merchandise diverts from the remembrance of God'. The verse also illuminates why believers are described as those who are 'perpetually at prayer ('ala salatihim da'imun)' (70:23). Such people are not merely regular in performing the canonical prayer at its appointed times; for the men of substance, there is no moment when they are not 'at prayer', if one understands 'prayer' as the remembrance of God. The Qur'an instructs mankind to 'establish the prayer for the sake of My remembrance' (20:14). The very purpose and goal of prayer, its spiritual value and substance, is thus the remembrance of God.

A saying of Ali (ع) is directly relevant here: 'Continuous invocation is the food of the spirit and the key to prayer (miftah al-salat).' This sheds further light on why the Qur'an says that 'prayer keepeth [one] away from lewdness and iniquity, and the remembrance of God is greater' (29:45). The formal, canonical prayer is described here in negative or constraining terms: it is a preventative. Its formality is a ritual necessity, but it is also, unavoidably, an existential limitation, performed and operative at one time and not another, expressed in certain forms and not others. The remembrance of God is greater in that it is the positive, enlivening substance of prayer; it is what liberates consciousness from the verbal, mental, and existential limits by which all formal prayer is defined. Since formal prayer is inescapably bounded by such limits, its baraka, its blessedness, can all too easily become confined, subjectively, within those same limits, so that one feels close to God only during formal prayer and not in everyday life outside the prayer-times. It is dhikr, in the sense of recollectedness and constant awareness of God, that allows prayer, or the consciousness shaped by prayer, to open outward into its intended essence: an awareness of the unconditional presence of God. Dhikr thus transforms a preventative measure against moral transgression into a positive apprehension of spiritual reality. One might say that the dhikru'Llah is 'greater' than the ritual or canonical prayer in the measure that spiritual awareness transcends moral conscience, or in the measure that essence transcends form. The 'lesser' is not negated by the 'greater' but is rather comprised within it, enriched by it, and brought to a fullness and scope it could never attain on its own. In this light one can better understand at least some of the reasons why the Imam, following the Prophet and the Qur'an, presents dhikru'Llah as the quintessence of worship and devotion.

What remains is the spiritual fruits of the remembrance of God, and in particular 'realization', tahqiq: the process by which al-Haqq, the Real, is 'made real' within oneself. This is closely related to the process the Imam earlier described as tawahhud, self-integration, the spiritual assimilation of oneness within oneself, as distinct from the simple theological affirmation of oneness, tawhid, in its conventional sense. In keeping with the Imam's characteristic use of paradox, the fruit of remembrance can be approached first by examining its very opposite: ghafla, heedlessness, or sahw, forgetfulness and distraction. Another striking example follows of how the Imam's sayings function implicitly as a commentary on Qur'anic verses, while opening onto a rich terrain of mystical speculation and spiritual contemplation concerning the ultimate consequences of the invocation and remembrance of God. The Qur'an is severe in its condemnation of those who pray ostentatiously and hypocritically, those who 'give the lie to religion': 'Woe to those who pray, those who are heedless of their prayer, those who make a show, and who withhold simple assistance' (107:4-7). The Imam likewise warns against remembering God heedlessly or distractedly, and in describing its opposite, perfect or complete dhikr, he articulates a paradoxical return to a kind of 'forgetting' that goes to the very heart of the Sufi principle of 'extinction in remembrance' (al-fana' fi'l-dhikr):

Do not remember God absent-mindedly (sahiyan), nor forget Him in distraction; rather, remember Him with perfect remembrance (dhikran kamilan), a remembrance in which your heart and tongue are in harmony, and what you conceal conforms with what you reveal. But you will not remember Him according to the true reality of the remembrance (haqiqat al-dhikr) until you forget your own soul in your remembrance.

This saying offers a summary of the entire mystical path. What is implied is the whole sequence of spiritual 'stations' (maqamat, sing. maqam) through which total sincerity is attained. Sufism is itself often described simply as 'sincerity', that is, sidq or ikhlas. To be totally sincere in this sense is to orient oneself and one's desires purely toward God, without any taint of impurity, where impurity means the presence, in one's devotion, action, or intention, of any desire for something other than God. On one hand, the dhikr itself helps to realize sincerity by 'polishing' the heart; on the other, it is sincerity that confers 'perfection' or 'completion' upon the spiritual efficacy of the dhikr. What matters at this stage of 'perfect' dhikr is that the outward verbal form of the invocation must harmonize with heartfelt intention. There must be no contradiction between what the tongue articulates and what motivates the heart. Bringing heart and tongue into harmony means that the divine Reality invoked by the tongue reverberates in the heart, the very source of the soul's fundamental dispositions, its virtues.

The divine qualities contained within the Name of the Absolute must, to some degree at least, be reflected in the heart and soul of the invoker, in the form of virtues, virtues that are summed up in the sincerity or 'purity' of soul to which ikhlas refers. When the soul is completely pure, sincerely and utterly at one with the highest ideals proclaimed by the tongue and the intellect, it becomes transparent to the spiritual qualities embedded within its own substance: the fitra, or primordial nature. These are the qualities 'brought to light', and brought to life, by the dhikr; they are the qualities that shine forth from the heart once it has been polished by the dhikr. In their absence, however, the purely technical act of invocation is 'heedless' and devoid of all efficacy. One who makes no effort to attain sincerity, who does not engage with the 'greater' jihad, is heedless of God, neglecting the moral concomitants of authentic remembrance and ignoring the moral preconditions for its efficacy.

Yet what is most remarkable in this saying of the Imam is his presentation of the ultimate stage of dhikr in terms of its apparent opposite. The 'reality' of dhikr, its haqiqa, opens outward into the supreme haqiqa, divine Reality as such. This degree of dhikr requires the 'forgetting' of the individual: the veil of the self must be cast aside if the spiritual vision of divine Reality is to be attained. There can be no ma'rifa without self-effacement at the outset, and 'extinction' (fana') in the end. The reality of 'remembering' calls for the most radical 'forgetting'.

In other words, there is a clear distinction, indeed a radical disjuncture, between 'perfect' dhikr and the 'reality' of dhikr, such that the movement from 'perfection' to 'reality', from human perfection to divine Reality, requires an ontological leap of consciousness. At the first level, where the aim is the elimination of hypocrisy and the attainment of sincerity, integrity, and totality, in short, perfection on the plane of the human soul, the individual as agent of the dhikr retains his identity. The harmonious reverberation between hidden intent and outward act is at this stage called 'perfect' dhikr. But it remains a dhikr that pertains to the individual as agent. At the higher level, by contrast, the dhikr can no longer be defined in relation to the individual, since the individual has been 'forgotten', by himself. This can only mean that the centre of consciousness has shifted from the invoker, al-dhakir, to the Invoked, al-Madhkur. The haqiqa of the dhikr is thus one with the object of invocation, the Real itself, al-Haqq. Esoterically, then, the true agent of the invocation is God Himself, the apparent invocation by man being no more than an outward appearance, an illusion extinguished by the very act of invocation itself.

The question of agency returns here. A hadith qudsi bears upon it: "My slave never ceases to draw near to Me through supererogatory acts (nawafil) until I love him." The Imam's commentary on the Qur'anic verses concerning those who are not distracted by the world from the remembrance of God made clear that the nawafil in question are centred upon the practice of invocation. Invocation, then, can be understood as disclosing the reality of God's ontological agency within all acts: God is the hearing and the seeing of the individual whom God loves as a result of his devotions. This account of the Divine penetrating the faculties of the soul and body describes a universal reality, the true state of affairs, and not any change of state, whether for God or for the individual. God does not "change" in order to enter into the acts and perceptions of one person rather than another.

His "becoming" one with the acts of perception is to be understood as a reality "becoming clear" to the soul that has been unveiled, so that it sees through the illusory appearance of its own agency. By virtue of the invocation, the soul is enabled to see the deeper meaning of two Qur'anic verses:

وَٱللَّهُ خَلَقَكُمْ وَمَا تَعْمَلُونَ

"God hath created you and what ye do" (37:96), and:

وَمَا رَمَيْتَ إِذْ رَمَيْتَ وَلَكِنَّ ٱللَّهَ رَمَىٰ

"thou didst not throw when thou threwest [the stones], but God threw" (8:17).

The kind of "vision" made possible by the dhikr is illuminated by the very title of one of Ibn al-'Arabi's treatises, Kitab al-fana' fi'l-mushahada (The Book of Extinction in Contemplation), which appears to point directly to the Imam's paradox of forgetting in the very heart of remembrance, for being extinguished in contemplation is akin to the state of being forgotten in invocation. At the opening of this treatise, Ibn al-'Arabi writes that the divine Reality is too exalted to be witnessed by the creaturely eye. The vision of God is impossible for as long as any "trace of the condition of the creature in the eye of the witness" subsists. Only toward the treatise's conclusion is this apparently insuperable barrier removed. Ibn al-'Arabi resolves the problem by means of the Prophet's definition of ihsan: "It is to worship God as though you see Him, and if you see Him not, yet truly He sees you." The Arabic wording is such that, by placing a stop in the middle of the phrase "if you see Him not (in lam takun: tarahu)," the meaning is entirely transformed into: "if you are not, you see Him."

This vision of God cannot, then, belong to the individual, who is "forgotten" in the Imam's words, or non-existent according to Ibn al-'Arabi. The vision of God can only be by God, not by man. The metaphysical underpinnings of this "ontological transference," in relation to the divine Names, receive their treatment further on. The message of "extinction in contemplation" is reinforced by the discourse, as narrated by Ibn al-'Arabi, between himself and Moses in the sixth heaven, presented within his account of his own visionary ascent through the heavens to the divine presence within his own soul.

He addresses Moses: "You requested the vision (of God), while the Messenger of God (Muhammad) said that 'not one of you will see his Lord until he dies.'"

Moses replies: "And it was just like that: when I asked Him for the vision, He answered me, so that I 'fell down stunned' (7:143). Then I saw Him in my (state of) being stunned."

Ibn al-'Arabi asks: "While (you were) dead?"

Moses: "While (I was) dead. I did not see God until I had died."

Here is a supra-personal vision entirely congruent with Ali (ع)'s unselfconscious remembrance. What is implicit in both forms of spiritual assimilation is the "ontological transference" of agency. The true vision of God cannot take place for as long as anything creaturely subsists in the "eye" of the beholder. The spiritual principle, and even some of the language, of this dialogue is rendered in condensed form in a supplication attributed to the Imam. He pleads with God to make him "one of those whom You have called and he has replied to You, upon whom You have glanced and who falls unconscious before Your majesty." The word sa'iqa ("to fall unconscious," "be stunned") used in this supplication is the same as that used in the Qur'anic verse (7:143) in relation to Moses' state when God revealed Himself to the mountain. A single "glance" from the Real is sufficient to precipitate this denouement of self-awareness, the shadow cast, upon the plane of individual consciousness, by the fulgurating light of the self-disclosure, the tajalli, of God.

This divine "glance" (lāhiza) returns the discussion to Ibn al-'Arabi's evocative phrase "extinction in contemplation." In his Tarjuman al-ashwaq, he refers to divine wisdom as a peacock that "kills with her glances," and adds in his own commentary that this refers to "the station" of al-fana' fi'l-mushahada (extinction in contemplation). Earlier in the same commentary, he refers to the "murderous glances" of this divine wisdom "which accrues to a man in his hours of solitude, and which assaults him with such violence that he is unable to behold his personality, and which exercises dominion over him." His commentary on the following lines is also instructive in underlining the relationship between dhikr and fana': "Wild is she, none can make her his friend; she has gotten in her solitary chamber (bayt khalwatiha), a mausoleum for remembrance (dhikr)." The commentary adds: "because contemplation of the Essence is a passing away (fana'). Her solitude is her looking on herself, for God says, 'Neither My earth nor My heaven contains Me, but I am contained by the heart of My believing servant,' and since the heart which contains this essential wisdom of the race of Jesus is bare and empty of all attributes, it is like a desert and she is like a wild animal."

Realization through remembrance, then, strictly implies the extinction of individual consciousness, the perishing of egoistic self-awareness before the Absolute. This principle is far from being purely speculative. Quite apart from the wealth of Sufi literature on the states of consciousness (ahwal, sing. hal) through which the mystic passes, there stands the evidence of the Imam's own immersion in such states. Abu'l-Darda', an eminent companion of the Prophet, reported that he once found Ali (ع) lying in one of the palm orchards of Medina, his body seemingly lifeless, as stiff as wood. He went to condole with Ali (ع)'s family, but was told by his wife Fatima, "My cousin has not died. Rather, in fear of God he has fainted. This condition overcomes him often." The "fear" in question is to be understood as "awe," and relates to the heavenly aspect of khawf, heavenly because Paradise is said to be the consequence of realising this kind of fear to perfection, as the Qur'an indicates: "But whoso feareth (khafa) the station of his Lord and restraineth his soul from caprice, verily, the Garden will be his abode" (79:40-41). "Fear of God," in the spiritual rather than the moralistic sense, does not so much terrify as beatify; it produces not simply quaking awe before the transcendent Absolute, but also intimate absorption within the immanent divine presence. As is often quoted in Sufism, when one fears creatures one flees from them, but when one fears God one flees to Him:

لَّا مَلْجَأَ مِنَ ٱللَّهِ إِلَّآ إِلَيْهِ

"There is no refuge from God except [fleeing] to Him" (9:118).

This report also shows that the following saying of the Imam is not mere extravagant rhetoric; rather, it appears to allude to an authentic state of spiritual intoxication, a total re-absorption of consciousness within its divine source, a description of the conditions leading up to the state that "overcomes him often," as Fatima put it:

Truly, God has a drink for His friends (awliya'ihi). When they drink it, they are intoxicated (sakara); and when they are intoxicated, they are enraptured ('araba); and when they are enraptured, they are blessed (taba); and when they are blessed, they dissolve (dhaba); and when they dissolve, they are free (khalasa); and when they are free, they devote themselves purely (akhlasa); and when they devote themselves purely, they seek (talaba); and when they seek, they find (wajada); and when they find, they arrive (wasala); and when they arrive, they are at one (ittasala); there is no difference between them and their Beloved.

This saying of the Imam echoes that of the Prophet, who claimed that he had states or "moments" (waqt) that no "angel brought close" nor "prophet sent forth" could encompass, the implication being that neither angel nor prophet can subsist as such in the ineffable "moments" of absolute tawhid. This is not "union": it is, rather, the realisation of oneness. Union implies two entities becoming one, whereas God is, as the Imam put it, "that which has no second." Even to call Him "one" falls short, since that word implies that a second might stand in sequence to Him; He is more truly named unique, a reality that admits no otherness. This ultimate realisation of tawhid can be seen as the fruit of the invocation, the most potent of all intoxicating "drinks," if prayer may be described as drink, and it leads to a careful consideration of the true agent of the invocation, the true "drinker." What appears to be man's invocation of God is transformed into the divine invocation of man; whereas at the outset it seems that man "drinks" God through His Name, the ultimate result of the invocation, unitive realisation, reveals that it is in fact God who "drinks into Himself" the essence of human consciousness, an essence from which the impurity of self-consciousness has been extracted. The true nature of the dhikr, masked by the outward form of man's invocation of God, is alluded to in another saying of the Imam: "The invocation is not a formality of speech nor a way of thinking; rather, it comes forth firstly from the Invoked, and secondly from the invoker (awwal min al-madhkur wa thanin min al-dhakir)."

It is thus God Himself who performs the invocation, first and foremost; man's invocation is but a shadow, a reflection, a consequence of this divine invocation. The polyvalence of the Imam's brief sentence opens onto a number of fruitful meditations upon the meaning, the origin, the end, and the very substance of the dhikr. Among these stands the Qur'anic verse cited earlier: "Remember Me, I will remember you."

This perception of the reality of the invocation reveals its spiritual efficacy more clearly. The reality denoted by the term dhikr is no longer confined within the boundaries of the individual, still less definable in terms of his verbal or mental activity. What dhikr means in its primary, metaphysical significance opens out into the realm of engendering, implying the function of existentiation, the effusion of Being. The creative Word uttered by God, "Be! (kun)," which brings the possibilities of being into existence, can be seen in this light as a form of dhikr: God utters the "name" of the possible thing, "calling" it from nonexistence into existence. This passage from nothingness to being is what renders the possible thing "remembered," madhkur. Here again, the Imam's sentence can be read both as a commentary on a Qur'anic verse and as an anticipation of the highly elaborate cosmogony associated with Ibn al-'Arabi.

The Qur'an poses the following question:

هَلْ أَتَىٰ عَلَى ٱلْإِنسَنِ حِينٌۭ مِّنَ ٱلدَّهْرِ لَمْ يَكُن شَيْـًۭٔا مَّذْكُورًا

"Hath there come upon man any moment in time when he was not a thing remembered?" (76:1). Man's being a "thing remembered" is here tantamount to his coming into being, and his nothingness is equivalent to his being "not remembered," that is, not yet called forth from the abyss of pre-existential hiddenness into the light of manifest existence. In this pre-existential state, the human being is, according to Ibn al-'Arabi, "known," ma'lum, but only by God. He refers to the above verse in the following lines of al-Futuhat al-makkiyya (The Meccan Illuminations):

God said of Himself that He is al-Badi', the Originator, that is, He created that which had no like or exemplar in all the degrees of being, for He knows, by His all-encompassing nature, every single thing that enters into the degrees of being. Therefore He says, as regards the creation of man, that he "was not a thing remembered," for His is the remembrance, so a thing has being in the remembrance of the one who remembers it.

God's "remembrance" of man thus precedes man's remembrance of God, ontologically, not merely temporally, and this constitutes another interpretation of the verse cited earlier: "and the remembrance of God is greater," infinitely greater, that is, than man's remembrance of Him. The true being of man resides in the "remembrance" God has of him. While man's devotion to God is articulated through the utterance of the divine Name, God's creation of man is articulated through His utterance of the creative Word. In Ibn al-'Arabi's cosmogony, the utterance of this Word is not simply an event in time; rather, that Word never ceases to reverberate, furnishing each human soul with its divine substrate, support, or foundation, its mustanad ilahi. This Word "breathes" existence upon the immutable entity, al-'ayn al-thabita, which, though inexistent in itself, determines the contours, form, and configuration of being that will be manifested through it, just as a prism refracts the light passing through it, or as water takes on the colour of its cup, an image used by Junayd and frequently quoted by Ibn al-'Arabi.

The hadith al-haqiqa, attributed to Ali (ع), contains the essence of the Akbari doctrine of the tajalli of the unique Light of God upon the differentiated "receptacles," the loci of manifestation for that Light. The Imam is questioned by his disciple Kumayl on the meaning of al-haqiqa. The response includes the following affirmations:

Al-haqiqa is the unveiling of the splendours of Majesty, without any allusion, the effacement of that which is erroneously imagined (al-mawham), together with the clarity of that which is truly known (al-ma'lum), the attraction of absolute unicity to the quality of tawhid, a light dawning from the morn of eternity, its traces shimmering on the temples of tawhid.

Al-Kashani comments on this last image: "That is, the manifestation of the Light of the one Essence upon the loci of manifestation of the qualities of the Real, the Essence, these being the loci of the entities of existents (a'yan al-mawjudat), which the Imam calls 'temples of tawhid,' that is, the forms of the divine Names in the station of tawhid." This mustanad ilahi, or divine support of each individual soul, is therefore its particular Lord, the divine Name that engenders and sustains it. The soul is but the locus of manifestation, the mazhar, where God discloses Himself in a particular, unique mode.

The very first words of the khutba with which Ibn al-'Arabi opens the Futuhat al-makkiyya are these: "Praise be to Him who engendered things from nothing, then negated it; and established their being through the orientation towards them of His Words." This orientation (tawajjuh) of the divine Word towards the possible thing results in the manifestation of the Word's properties in accordance with the receptivity of that possible thing; the possibility is then "breathed" into existence and becomes akin to a "body," the "heart" of which is the divine Name existentiating it: "every slave has a Name which is its Lord; so it becomes the 'body' of that Name, which is its 'heart.'"

This analogy recalls the Imam's image of the dhikr as a "polish" for hearts. The Name revealed from "above" is mirrored by a Name that resounds from "within." The reciprocal reflection appears when the rust obscuring the surface of the heart is removed by the polish of the dhikr. A mode of union between two divine realities is evoked here, calling to mind once again the phrase "light upon light."

Earlier the Imam had spoken of the Names of God "which have filled the foundations of all things," a phrase that anticipates Ibn al-'Arabi's understanding of the divine Names as the supports and substrata of all things. Yet a question arises here, and the answers to it draw one closer to comprehending the powerful and mysterious efficacy of the dhikr. What is the difference between the divine Names conceived as the metaphysical roots of all things, and the particular Names of God as revealed in the Qur'an? On one hand, the whole of creation is the "Book of God," and every phenomenon is one of the "words" of God. On the other, the revealed text contains specific words and Names, and it is these that are to be recited and invoked. Why?

One clear answer is given in the following verse:

قُلِ ٱدْعُوا۟ ٱللَّهَ أَوِ ٱدْعُوا۟ ٱلرَّحْمَنَ ۖ أَيًّۭا مَّا تَدْعُوا۟ فَلَهُ ٱلْأَسْمَآءُ ٱلْحُسْنَىٰ ۚ وَلَا تَجْهَرْ بِصَلَاتِكَ وَلَا تُخَافِتْ بِهَا وَٱبْتَغِ بَيْنَ ذَلِكَ سَبِيلًۭا

"Call upon Allah or call upon al-Rahman. By whatever Name you call upon Him, His are the most beautiful Names" (17:110).

The Qur'an itself enjoins believers to invoke these specific, revealed Names, and not others. These Names are therefore utterly unlike the names of the idolaters' gods:

إِنْ هِىَ إِلَّآ أَسْمَآءٌۭ سَمَّيْتُمُوهَآ أَنتُمْ وَآبَآؤُكُم مَّآ أَنزَلَ ٱللَّهُ بِهَا مِن سُلْطَنٍ ۚ إِن يَتَّبِعُونَ إِلَّا ٱلظَّنَّ وَمَا تَهْوَى ٱلْأَنفُسُ ۖ وَلَقَدْ جَآءَهُم مِّن رَّبِّهِمُ ٱلْهُدَىٰٓ

"They are but names that ye have named, ye and your fathers, for which God hath revealed no authority" (53:23).

The names of idols resemble the conventional names of phenomena in that they are merely arbitrary labels or signs, bearing no intrinsic relationship to the phenomena themselves, still less to the principles underlying those phenomena. The Names of God, revealed by God, are of another order. They are penetrated by the very substance of the reality they denote. For this reason they possess "authority" (sultan), and by virtue of that authority they have the power to transform and not merely to inform. They are, in other words, impregnated with a theurgic power, the capacity to render present to mind and heart the immanent reality of God.

Though God's presence is inalienable, since nothing existent can possibly lie "outside" His all-encompassing presence, that presence can nonetheless become veiled, at least subjectively. The heart can be veiled from God by the "rust" of forgetfulness that covers it, so that the divine Reality comes to be veiled by the very phenomena that manifest it. The Imam raises the question of how it is "by things" that the Creator manifests Himself, and yet also "by things" that He is hidden from sight.

This being so, what is needed to open oneself to the divine presence within and beyond all things is twofold: a polishing of one's own "within" through the dhikr, and an unveiling or revelation from that "beyond." This latter disclosure can be understood as a direct revelation of God within that indirect revelation of Him which consists in the entirety of the created cosmos, a cosmos that simultaneously reveals and veils the divine Reality. Even if, from a certain point of view, the two revelations, cosmic and scriptural, are both defined as manifestations of God, from another point of view the scriptural revelation is charged with a spiritual power that renders it incomparably more revealing than the created cosmos. In terms of spiritual method there is no common measure between the cosmos as manifested divine "Word" and Allah as a revealed Name of God. On one hand there is differentiated manifestation; on the other, a unique revelation. The divine Name may also be called the quintessential manifestation, at once summing up the entire realm of manifestation and transcending it.

The difference between cosmic manifestation and scriptural revelation may be seen, in one respect, as analogous to that between shadow and light. Revelation is like a projection of the pure Light of God, and is therefore of one substance with the source from which it emanates, whereas manifestation is like the shadow cast by that light. Both are projections of one and the same reality, yet this does not diminish the incommensurability between light and darkness. In the words of Ibn al-'Arabi, "The very Being of the Real is a verified Light, the very existence of creation is a shadow following after."

There is a remarkable supplication attributed to Ali (ع), the Du'a' al-Mashlul, the "supplication of the lame man." It consists of one hundred and twenty-two verses containing a multitude of divine Names, attributes, and titles. Toward the end of the supplication one reads a verse that can be taken as the key to the entire text: "I ask Thee by every Name with which Thou hast named Thyself." It is the fact that God "names Himself" that imparts to His Names their theurgic power, their sacramental substance, their mystical efficacy. It is the revealed substance of the Names that accounts for these distinctive properties and renders them incomparable to any other names. This is why, as Sufi texts so commonly assert, the Name is the Named (al-ism huwa'l-musamma).

These reflections on the ontological relationship between the Names of God and the nature of being, while they illuminate certain aspects of the dhikr as a mystical practice, nonetheless fall short of accounting for that ontological leap of consciousness, that extinction of self-awareness, to which the Imam refers in the words, "you will not remember Him according to the true reality of the remembrance until you forget your own soul in your remembrance." The question then follows: why and how does the dhikr produce this extinction of consciousness, this effacement of individual being, especially given that the function of dhikr appears to be precisely the opposite, namely, to actualize or precipitate a heightened mode of consciousness and to deepen one's quality of being?
