# Extinction and the Name: The Death of the Saint

Extinction and the Name: The Death of the Saint

The first response to that question begins with a limit. The individual cannot, on his own, make the leap from remembrance to forgetfulness. It is impossible for a conscious person, concentrating on the invocatory act, to render himself unconscious of himself in the course of that invocation. The Imam's phrasing is exact: the soul is to be forgotten 'in' the remembrance. Any effort to will oneself into a state of unconsciousness emanates from a conscious will, and thus entrenches, rather than effaces, self-consciousness. This is therefore not a matter of forcing oneself to forget oneself while invoking God. It is rather a matter of total concentration on the Name, an attempt to be so focused on the Name that no room remains in one's consciousness, no 'space' mentally or existentially, for anything but the Named, the reality being invoked. A certain initial degree of self-effacement can thus be seen as a natural concomitant of total concentration.

The ultimate consummation of self-effacement in fana', however, comes about as a divine grace, as something that surpasses all individual effort, even if the act of invocation is understood to attract this grace, or to remove from the heart the 'rust' that obscures the vision of one's own nothingness before the sole reality of God, 'that which has no second'. This part of the response can be summed up by an esoteric reading of the Qur'anic words, '... thou wilt not forget, unless God willeth it so' (87: 6-7). Al-Kalabadhi, author of one of the most important early manuals of Sufism, opens his chapter on dhikr with words that echo those of the Imam: 'The haqiqa of the dhikr is this: that you forget everything other than the madhkur (the Invoked) in the dhikr. For He says: "So remember thy Lord when thou hast forgotten" (18: 24). That is, when you have forgotten what is not God, then you have remembered God.'

The second response can be framed in terms of the principle of inverse analogy. The human invocation is analogous to the divine invocation, being a kind of reflection of it, and, like any reflected image, the human act of invocation both positively participates in what it reflects and inverts it. In the first respect, the human act of invocation leads to a greater plenitude of consciousness and a fuller participation in being for the invoker. In the second respect, the human invocation finds its consummation in what appears to be the very opposite: the effacement of the individual in the object invoked. Yet this is only apparently opposed to the enhancement of consciousness and being. In reality it is the fulfilment of that same process, though its final stage involves a quantum leap, the negation of the limits that constitute individuality as such. Insofar as the individual is limited, and insofar as limitation is itself a negation, the negation of this negation amounts to pure affirmation: the affirmation of unconditional, supra-individual being. This negation of negation, on the plane of the self, can be seen as the reflection of that negation of nothingness expressed in Ibn al-'Arabi's line, 'Praise be to Him who engendered things from nothing, then negated it.'

Here the Imam's enigmatic saying returns: 'I am the death of the dead.' It recalls the words Rumi places in the Imam's mouth in these lines of his Mathnawi:

He said, 'I am wielding the sword for God's sake, I am the servant of God, I am not under the command of the body.

I am the Lion of God, I am not the lion of my passion: my deed bears witness to my religion.

In war I am (manifesting the truth of) thou didst not throw when thou threwest: I am (but) as the sword, and the wielder is the (divine) Sun.

I have removed the baggage of self out of the way, I have deemed (what is) other than God to be non-existence.

I am a shadow, the Sun is my lord; I am the chamberlain, I am not the curtain (which prevents approach) to Him.

I am filled with the pearls of union, like a (jewelled) sword: in battle I make (men) living, not slain.

Whereas the cosmic unfolding of creation, the movement from God to man, requires the negation of that relative nothingness which is pregnant with the possibilities of being, the realization of God by man requires the negation of that same 'nothingness' that was breathed into being by God. Ibn al-'Arabi's treatise Extinction in Contemplation names what is at stake: 'the extinction of that which never was ... and the subsistence of that which never ceased to be.' The following Qur'anic verses are clearly implied: 'Everything thereon perisheth (fan), and there subsisteth (yabqa) only the Face of thy Lord, possessor of glory and bounty' (55: 26-27).

Yet all things, insofar as they exist, have two aspects or 'faces': the divine aspect, which is the true being of the thing, and the created aspect, which is 'nothing'. The 'Face' of the Lord that alone subsists is therefore not simply the divine Reality above and beyond all things, but also that same reality within all things. This is the import of al-Ghazali's esoteric commentary on the Qur'anic verse, 'Everything perisheth except His Face' (28: 88). Al-Ghazali comments:

[it is] not that it perisheth at some particular moment, but rather it is forever perishing, since it cannot be conceived except as perishing. For each thing other than God is, when considered in and by itself, pure nothingness; and if considered from the face (wajh) to which existence flows to it from the Prime Reality, it is viewed as existing, but not in itself, solely from the face which accompanies Him Who gives it existence. Therefore, the divine face is the sole thing in reality.

He then connects the mystical realization of this oneness to the invocation of God and to the forgetting of the self in that invocation, and in doing so provides a valuable commentary on the meaning of this total dissolution of self-consciousness. The Sufis who verify this oneness through mystical 'taste' (dhawq), he writes, are 'drowned in oneness', such that they become 'dumbfounded':

No capacity remained within them save to recall Allah; yea, not so much as the capacity to recall their own selves ... when this state prevails, it is called in relation to him who experiences it Extinction, nay Extinction of Extinction, for the soul has become extinct to itself, extinct to its own extinction; for it becomes unconscious of itself and unconscious of its own unconsciousness, since were it conscious of its own unconsciousness, it would be conscious of itself.

Pertinent here too is the statement attributed by al-Qushayrī to Abu 'Uthman, which sheds light on another dimension of the 'unconsciousness' realized through invocation: 'Whoever has not tasted the loneliness of unconsciousness will not find the food of the intimacy of remembrance.' Here, losing consciousness of oneself is equated with 'loneliness', while becoming fully conscious of God through invocation results in 'intimacy'. One cannot find true intimacy with the divine Reality except by depriving the self of its false 'intimacy', that self-satisfied, habitual self-centredness which is the shadow cast by self-awareness. It is this awareness of self that, in the Imam's statement, must be forgotten. This higher forgetfulness cannot arise except on the basis of the remembrance of God, for it is the source of Being, unconditional Consciousness, and eternal Life that alone is capable of extinguishing, eclipsing, or effacing the relative existence, partial consciousness, and apparent life of the individual. This, the haqīqa of the dhikr, is expressed with perfect economy in the Imam's own words: '... forget your own soul in your remembrance.'

The state of fanā', the ultimate degree of this 'forgetting' of oneself, is therefore a grace. It cannot be attained by the individual, however great the effort he exerts. But this does not imply any abandonment of effort on the part of the invoker. On the contrary, as the Sufi tradition abundantly attests, fanā' is closely linked with the practice of dhikr, being its very climax. Subsequent to this state, or ḥāl, of extinction comes the station, or maqām, of subsistence, baqā', a return of consciousness to the self, a self now transfigured by the knowledge of reality impressed upon the soul in the state of fanā'. For it is only in the state of fanā' that the ultimate 'vision' of absolute oneness is attained, a vision in which there is no room for the ontological duality that is the inescapable concomitant of individuality. To posit the 'individual' is to posit its correlate, the Lord, and thus to affirm duality.

Al-Kāshānī makes this point in his commentary on the Qur'anic verse, 'Remember Him as He hath guided you' (2:198), where he traces the guided ascent through the degrees of the dhikr. The first is the dhikr of the tongue, which corresponds to the soul (al-nafs); then that of the heart (al-qalb), which corresponds to the divine acts, those which manifest His graces; then that of the 'secret' (al-sirr), corresponding to the vision of the divine acts together with 'the unveiling of the sciences of the manifestation of the divine qualities'; then that of the spirit (al-rūḥ), corresponding to 'the contemplation of the lights of the manifestations of the divine qualities, with an apprehension of the light of the Essence'; then comes the dhikr of 'the hidden' (al-khafī), which is 'the contemplation of the beauty of the Essence along with the subsistence of duality'; and finally the dhikr of the Essence, 'which is essential vision, attained through the removal of duality.'

The same point emerges from the counsel of Ibn 'Aṭā'illāh, which illuminates the way in which the dhikr generates receptivity to the divine presence and to the grace by which alone the individual can truly 'forget' himself, in the sense of becoming 'unconscious of his own unconsciousness', as al-Ghazālī put it:

Do not abandon the invocation because you do not feel the Presence of God therein. For your forgetfulness of the invocation of Him is worse than your forgetfulness in the invocation of Him. Perhaps He will take you from an invocation with forgetfulness (ghafla) to one with vigilance (yaqaẓa), and from one with vigilance to one with the Presence of God (ḥuḍūr), and from one with the Presence of God to one wherein everything but the Invoked (al-Madhkūr) is absent. 'And that is not difficult for God.'

In his commentary on the Ḥikam, Ibn 'Ajība adds: 'So, in the measure that one is extinguished in the Name, one is extinguished in the Essence.' This follows from the principle that the Name is the Named. In another treatise, a commentary on a poem by Shushtarī on the divine Name Allāh, he articulates this cardinal tenet of the invocatory discipline in Sufism more explicitly. The first line of the poem reads, referring to the letters of which Allāh is composed: 'The alif before two lāms, then a hā': coolness of the eyes.' Ibn 'Ajība comments: 'The "coolness of the eyes", this is joy, for tears of joy, as one knows by experience, are cool. The author means this: this Name is the joy of my heart, its happiness, its beatitude.' He then cites some lines from al-Ḥallāj on the letters of the Name Allāh, adds a verse of his own, and follows with this comment: 'The Name is not other than the Named, for joy cannot come from anything but the essence of a thing, not from the name as such.'

This encapsulates the doctrine of identity between the Name and the Named, the rationale for the Sufi practice of dhikru'Llāh. Yet here a certain problem arises. However congruent the Imam's pronouncements on the dhikr may be with these later Sufi expressions of the underlying principles, this particular stress on the identity between the Name and the Named appears, on the surface, to stand in tension with numerous sayings of the Shi'i Imams which deny that the Name is the Named. Imam Ja'far al-Ṣādiq, for instance, is reported as saying:

The Name of Allāh is other than Him. For everything to which the name of a thing is applicable is a creation, hence other than God. For whatever the tongue expresses, or is worked on by the hand, is a creation ... everything described is created, and the Creator of things cannot be described within the limits of a named object.

Allāh has ninety-nine Names. If the Name were the Named, then every one of the Names would be a god. But Allāh is the one meaning, or spiritual reality, ma'nā, indicated by the Names, and all of them are other than Him.

This apparent contradiction can be resolved in two ways. First, one must attend carefully to what is meant by the word 'Name' in the two respective contexts: that of doctrinal distinction, in which the Absolute is rigorously distinguished from the relative and the Essence from all forms; and that of methodic concentration, in which the Absolute is understood to be the reality of the very form through which it reveals itself. One can then turn to one of the most esoteric aspects of the Shi'i Imams' conception of themselves, their references to their own selves as the 'most beautiful Names' (al-asmā' al-ḥusnā).

As regards the meaning of 'Name', Ibn al-'Arabī offers a precise definition: '[T]he Names have two connotations; the first connotation is God Himself who is what is named, the second that by which one Name is distinguished from another ... As being essentially the other, the Name is the Reality, while as being not the other, it is the imagined Reality.' Each Name is, on the one hand, identified with every other Name by virtue of its essential identity with the Named, the one Essence that is the source of all the Names. On the other hand, each Name has its own specific meaning and quality, the relationship by which the one Reality engages with the created cosmos. In this latter respect, each Name is distinguished from the others, and distinction implies limitation, hence relativity and, ultimately, a kind of illusion before the one and only Reality. It is in this sense that the Name assumes the character of 'imagined Reality'. In Ibn al-'Arabī's perspective, the Names have no separate ontological entities of their own; they all revert to the one and only Reality, that of the divine Essence. This dissolves the problem, raised in the saying of Imam Ja'far, of different Names implying different 'gods'.

In the lexicon of Sufi terms, Laṭā'if al-i'lām fī ishārāt ahl al-ilhām (Subtle Disclosures in the Allusions of the Folk of Inspiration), attributed to al-Kāshānī, one finds a definition of the divine Names that also helps to distinguish between these two connotations. Under the term 'Names of the Divinity', the text reads:

These are, in the terminology of the Sufis, expressive of the manifest aspect of being, in respect of its determination within a specific meaning. For every divine Name is the manifest aspect of being, which, in turn, is identical to the Essence, but not as the Essence is in itself; rather, in respect of its specification and determination within a particular meaning, or what one might call a 'quality'. For example, the Name al-Ḥayy ('The Living') is a Name of manifest, determined being, but in respect of its specification and determination as a particular meaning, it is Life. So in regard to being itself, al-Ḥayy is identical to the Essence, whilst in regard to its determination as a particular meaning, it is other than the Essence. If you have understood what we have said, you will know what is meant by the saying: the Name is not identical to the Essence, the Named, neither is it other than It.

There is a nominal and cognitive distinction between the Name and the Named, in terms of which the Name is not the Named; but at the same time, there is a spiritual assimilation between the Name and the Named, such that the Name is the Named. Beyond this, a further distinction must be taken into account: the verbal form of the Name is to be distinguished from the Name as an attribute of the Essence. On the one hand, the Name in this latter sense is nothing but the divine attribute it designates, and this attribute is in turn identical to the Essence. On the other hand, there is the 'name' of this Name, which is merely a verbal form. This distinction is brought to light by Qayṣarī, another key commentator of Ibn al-'Arabī, in the introduction to his commentary on the Fuṣūṣ al-ḥikam.

The Essence, considered together with a determined quality and in relation to one of Its theophanies, is named by a Name. So 'The Compassionate' has an essence, which is compassion, and 'The All-Conquering' has an essence, which is all-conquering power. These spoken Names are Names of Names, and from this may be understood the meaning of the saying: The Name is identical to the Named.

In his monumental commentary on Qayṣarī's introduction, Jalāl al-Dīn Āshtiyanī, a contemporary authority on Shi'i 'Irfan, makes an important observation after citing this passage, one that returns the discussion to the principle of extinction through the invocation of the Name, and also to the second point raised earlier, namely that the Imams themselves constitute the 'most beautiful Names'. Āshtiyanī writes that the saints frequently speak of the Names as being one with the Named because they are implicitly referring to the referent (misdaq), which is the sifa, the divine attribute or quality: 'The sifat are in one respect the specifications of the Essence, while in the station of unicity they are annihilated in the Essence, and are thus identical to the Essence.'

This metaphysical conception of the relationship between the Name, the sifa, and the Essence mirrors, objectively and universally, the path traced subjectively and mystically by the soul extinguished in and by the invocation of the Name. This extinction is what is meant by fana (فنیٰ), the perishing of egoistic consciousness before the Absolute. Just as the ṣifat are 'annihilated' in the Essence, with which they are thus absolutely and unconditionally one, so the soul extinguished by the Name attains at one and the same time its total nullification and its ultimate realization, though no longer as an individual soul. It is only by virtue of the divine theophany, the particular divine Name, the 'heart' that constitutes the soul's true being, its mustanad ilahi, that this 'extinction' on the plane of the individual soul amounts to 'realization' on the plane of transcendence. Here the deepest reality of tawhid is revealed. The individual no longer affirms the notion that 'there is no god but God', for the individual has been extinguished by the reality that 'there is no reality but the one and only Reality'. God is 'that which has no second'. Just as 'No one has truly said Allah but Allah', so too no one realizes God but God. It is God alone who comes to 'know' or 'be' Himself, and this constitutes one aspect of the purpose of creation, as indicated in the hadith qudsi: 'I was a hidden treasure and I loved to be known.'

In this light the saints (al-awliya') are perfectly self-realized theophanies, totally effaced in that of which they are theophanic manifestations, their very effacement in the divine Reality being the ultimate source of their knowledge of it. This applies a fortiori to the Prophet himself, the prototype of all the saints and the 'perfect man', al-insan al-kamil. In this connection Sabziwarī cites the saying of Ali (ع), 'We are the most beautiful Names', in his commentary on the divine Names: 'There is no doubt that they are His most exalted indicators and His greatest signs ('ala imihi'l-'uzma wa ayatihi'l-kubra), as the Prophet said, God bless him and his family, "Whoso sees me has seen the Truth (al-Haqq)."' He proceeds to equate the spiritual station, or inner reality, of the Imams with those of the divine Names and attributes, stressing that the divine Essence transcends all Names and attributes and is forever ineffable, known only to itself. The Prophet, the Imam, the saint, the 'perfect man', thus manifest those aspects of the divine nature that can be perceived on the human plane. The more the divine Essence is exalted in transcendence above all Names and attributes, the more brilliantly those Names and attributes are reflected in the mirror constituted by the 'perfect man'. The unknowable transcendence of the hidden 'treasure' is, to some degree, compensated by the faithful reflection of its communicable aspects in the 'friend of God'.

The implications of identifying the Imam with the divine Name or attribute repay reflection, for in one respect this identification would appear to be shirk, the 'association' of a creature, however exalted, with the transcendent Reality. The same appears to apply to the ecstatic utterances (shathiyyat) of many of the most celebrated Sufis, such as the ana'l-Haqq ('I am the Real') of al-Hallaj and the subhanī ('Glory to me') of Bayazīd. Yet when one adopts a viewpoint shaped by the Imam's own conception of the divine attributes, a very different picture emerges, one that, far from being tainted by shirk, in fact reaches the most profound application of tawhid. The first sermon of the Nahj al-balagha contains the following remarkable and highly important statements regarding the attributes of God:

The perfection of purification (ikhlas) is to divest Him of all attributes (sifat) because of the testimony of every attribute that it is other than the object of attribution, and because of the testimony of every such object that it is other than the attribute. So whoever ascribes an attribute to God, glorified be He, has conjoined Him with something else; and whoever so conjoins Him has made Him twofold; and whoever makes Him twofold has fragmented Him; and whoever thus fragments Him is ignorant of Him.

When the Imam says that pure devotion to God requires divesting God of all attributes, the negation here is not of the divine attributes as such. Rather, it is a negation of them as separate, autonomous, or super-added realities conceived of as substantially 'other than' or ontologically distinct from the Essence of God. For the reality of God's attributes is clearly affirmed in an earlier phrase in the same sermon: 'He whose attribute has no binding limitation (alladhi laysa li-sifatihi hadd mahdud).' What is denied is the possibility of confining the reality of any divine attribute within the boundaries of human conception and language. Since no divine attribute can be distinct from the divine nature, and since this nature is infinite, every attribute is likewise of infinite scope and thus beyond all the limitations presupposed by formal conception and linguistic definition.

In one respect, then, the attribute or Name is to be affirmed, and in another respect it is to be negated: affirmed as not other than the Essence, negated insofar as it is conceived in itself, on its own account. This metaphysical perception of the relationship between the attribute or Name and the Essence can also be applied, mystically, to the relationship between the individual soul and the divine Reality. On its own account the individual is nothing, while in respect of the divine substrate, the divine Name, the mustanad ilahi that constitutes its essential reality, it is not other than the unique Real. According to Ibn al-'Arabī, 'The final end and ultimate return of the gnostics is that the Real is identical with them, while they do not exist.' This is a perfect expression of the dual aspect of the soul of the realized sage: insofar as he is aware that 'he does not exist', he knows that the Real is his true identity. However paradoxical it may appear, the mystic's realization of absolute Reality goes hand in hand with his realization of his own non-existence. These two aspects of the one and same realization are elliptically expressed by Ibn al-'Arabī. He describes the climax of his spiritual ascent, his mi'raj, when he recounts that God removed from him his 'contingent dimension (imkan)', resulting in the attainment of 'the inner realities of all the Names'. He continues:

Thus I attained in this nocturnal journey the inner realities (ma'ani) of all the Names, and I saw them returning to One Subject (musamma) and One Entity ('ayn): that Subject was what I witnessed and that Entity was my Being. For my voyage was only in myself and pointed to myself, and through this I came to know that I was a pure 'servant' without a trace of lordship in me at all.

This passage helps explain so many of the ecstatic utterances of the Sufis and the apparently self-deifying statements of the Imams. Their personal servitude to God is not denied. On the contrary, it is fully realized through the knowledge of their true identity, for that identity as the Named is attained only upon the effacement of their individuality. Like the divine attributes, they are mustahlak, annihilated in the divine Essence, so that there can be no question of any individualistic appropriation of the glory of God. When the Imam appears to speak of his own greatness, this is nothing but the greatness of God being expressed through him as a mazhar, a locus for the theophanic manifestation of the divine, and this precisely in the measure of his own effacement in that greatness.

The same point is reinforced by what 'Attar recounts in his Tadhkiratu'l-awliya' about Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq. A person accused him of being proud, and the Imam replied: 'I am not proud, for pride pertains to the divine greatness. Since I have gone beyond the pride of self, His pride has come and taken the place of my own pride. With pride of self present, there can be no divine greatness, but through the divine greatness, pride will be present.' The divine qualities shine with greater, not lesser, brilliance through the prism of a soul rendered transparent to the divine Reality, a transparency that results from the dissolution of all the clouds of egoism and passion.

A holy utterance bears on this: 'My slave draws near to Me through nothing I love more than that which I have made obligatory for him. My slave never ceases to draw near to Me through supererogatory acts (nawafil) until I love him. And when I love him, I am his hearing by which he hears, his sight by which he sees, his hand by which he grasps, and his foot by which he walks.'

In the light of the foregoing, the paradox contained in this divine utterance can now be resolved. On the one hand, the most beloved thing to God appears to be the obligatory rites. On the other, it is the supererogatory rites that lead the slave to draw near to God until He loves him, this love being apparently greater insofar as it results in the divine penetration of the human faculties, the unitive realization proper to tawhid. The paradox resolves, however, once one understands that God's 'love' for the obligatory rites is a love directed toward something apart from Himself, whereas when His love is for the 'slave', the pure slave effaced in his Lord, this love is infinitely greater, insofar as it partakes of God's love for His own Self-manifestation, and thus for Himself. In the beginning, God 'loved to be known', and so He created the world. In 'knowing' Himself through the effaced slave, the apparent 'other', His love to be known is realized through the saint whose greatest glory is, precisely, his own effacement, poverty, and emptiness of self.

It is in this sense that the following statement of the Imam is to be understood: 'Down from me torrents do pour; up to me no bird can soar.' Torrents flow down from him because, and in the measure that, he is extinguished in the source of the torrent. This image recalls the Qur'anic description of the 'slaves of God' who, unlike the 'righteous', drink directly from the celestial spring of Kafur, identified ultimately with the divine Essence: 'Truly, the righteous shall drink from a cup flavoured with Kafür, a spring wherefrom the slaves of God drink, making it gush forth abundantly' (76: 5-6). These slaves cause the spring's flow to increase because, according to al-Kāshānī, 'they are themselves the sources of this spring; there is no duality or otherness. Were it otherwise, it would not be the fountain of Kafur, because of the darkness of the veil of egoity (ana iyya) and duality.'

The final degree of the dhikr, as al-Kāshānī defined it, is the dhikr of the Essence, 'which is essential vision, attained through the removal of duality'. The dhikr 'polishes' away not only the impurities of the heart and mind but, ultimately, through the grace of the madhkur, all taint of duality, including, pre-eminently, that fundamental postulate of duality, the individual as such. It removes all subtle or hidden shirk, the 'partners' in being that are non-existent before the One 'that has no second', and establishes the spiritual principle of tawhid, such that the heart transfigured by the knowledge of the sole Reality comes to perceive the light of that Reality reflected in all the mirrors of creation. To realize, to 'make real' in the fullest sense, this one and only Reality is, by the same token, to realize the unreality, or merely apparent reality, of everything else.

At this level of realization there is an inescapable degree of perplexity accompanying the revelation of the divine Reality on every side. The elevation of the divine Essence beyond all comprehension makes it all the more inescapable that creaturely consciousness must be utterly annihilated if that Essence is to be 'realized', if gnosis of it is to be attained. On the one hand, one 'knows' God by knowing that His Essence is unknowable, utterly other, utterly transcendent, the essence of the Creator lying beyond the veil constituted by creation itself. On the other hand, the very distinction between creature and Creator is effaced when the creature has 'forgotten' itself, not merely as a notion but existentially, in a state of authentic contemplative extinction. Then it is no longer a question of one form of self-consciousness replacing another, but of the 'self' being taken out of the equation altogether, leaving only pure consciousness as such, which cannot 'belong' to or pertain to any entity without being reduced to the relativity proper to that entity. Thus, consciousness of the Absolute, that is, 'being conscious of the Absolute', is transmuted into absolute consciousness. The Real is 'realized' not by another, but through another, whence the designation al-'arif bi'Llah, literally 'the knower through God' rather than simply 'the knower of God'. The Imam says, 'Know God through God.' Knowledge of God at this deepest level is the Real knowing itself through the creature, and to say 'through' implies an unimpeded passage, the creature being qualified by perfect faqr, poverty, self-effacement, and, ultimately, extinction.

Realization through remembrance, however, implies not only 'forgetting' everything in existence except God, but also discovering that, in reality, there is nothing in being but God. In the Imam's image of the 'polish' effected by remembrance, the heart, once blind and deaf, is rendered capable of 'seeing' and 'hearing'. It sees the Face of God wherever it looks, and hears the cosmic hymn of remembrance and praise sung by the whole of creation, for every creature in existence proclaims the infinite creativity of its Creator. As the Qur'an says:

وَلِلَّهِ ٱلْمَشْرِقُ وَٱلْمَغْرِبُ ۚ فَأَيْنَمَا تُوَلُّوا۟ فَثَمَّ وَجْهُ ٱللَّهِ ۚ إِنَّ ٱللَّهَ وَسِعٌ عَلِيمٌۭ

'Wherever ye turn, there is the Face of God' (2:115).

أَلَمْ تَرَ أَنَّ ٱللَّهَ يُسَبِّحُ لَهُۥ مَن فِى ٱلسَّمَوَتِ وَٱلْأَرْضِ وَٱلطَّيْرُ صَٓفَّتٍۢ ۖ كُلٌّۭ قَدْ عَلِمَ صَلَاتَهُۥ وَتَسْبِيحَهُۥ ۗ وَٱللَّهُ عَلِيمٌۢ بِمَا يَفْعَلُونَ

'Do you not see that God is the one who is glorified by everything in the heavens and the earth, and the birds with wings outstretched; each one indeed knows its prayer and its glorification, and God is All-Aware of what they do' (24:41).

A final reflection concerns a passage from the Imam's famous and much-disputed Khutbat al-bayan, 'The Sermon of Clarifying Expression':

I am the Sign of the All-Powerful. I am the gnosis of the mysteries. I am the Threshold of Thresholds. I am the companion of the radiance of the divine Majesty. I am the First and the Last, the Manifest and the Hidden. I am the Face of God. I am the mirror of God, the supreme Pen, the Tabula secreta. I am he who in the Gospel is called Elijah. I am he who is in possession of the secret of God's Messenger.

This extraordinary affirmation of the Imam's inmost reality may appear shocking to the exoteric mentality, and is all too easily misread as a blasphemous self-deification in the manner of Hallaj. One key to unlocking the correct understanding of these declarations of 'his' true nature is the statement: 'I am the gnosis of the mysteries.' Once this is grasped, every other statement falls naturally into place. For here the Imam is not identifying himself with God, but with the knowledge of God, and not with his own knowledge of God, since that would still be a relative knowledge belonging to himself as a relative being. Only knowledge itself, the knowledge God has of Himself, not the knowledge a human being has of God, can be fully identified with its object. The distinctions between knowledge, knower, and known dissolve only at this transcendent level, just as the distinction between knowledge and being ceases to operate there. Thus the knower is the known when the knowledge in question is that consciousness which the divine Reality has of itself, and individual consciousness gains access to this knowledge only on condition of the utter extinction of every trace of individual, creaturely selfhood. To 'remember' God, one must have 'forgotten' oneself. To 'be' the knowledge of God is, by way of metaphysical reverberation, to 'be' everything that God is, for the consciousness that is absolutely at one with the Absolute is nothing other than 'the radiance of the divine Majesty'. Insofar as this consciousness is one with 'the gnosis of the mysteries', and these mysteries (asrar) are all rooted in the ultimate mystery (al-sirr), the one and only Essence of God, it is of necessity one with all the divine attributes. It is in this sense that the Imam can proclaim: 'I am the First and the Last, the Manifest and the Hidden.'

Analogous remarks apply to the claim to be "the Face of God" (wajh Allah). It becomes intelligible only once one grasps that the Imam describes himself as the "mirror" of God. A mirror loses its identity as mirror when attention is fixed exclusively on the object reflected within it, so that the mirror's own surface becomes, as it were, invisible and only the object is seen. Conversely, when the mirror itself is the object of attention, the face reflected within it can no longer be seen. The mirror is thus identified with what it reflects, which in a certain sense is "in" the mirror, without the mirror ceasing to be a mirror, and without the Face ceasing to be absolutely independent of it. The "veil" here is the mirror itself. Directing attention to it as such prevents one from seeing the object it reflects; but once attention is wholly fixed on the image the mirror contains, the mirror ceases to be a veil and instead reveals the object itself. Within this symbolism, forgetting the mirror corresponds to the effacement of the self, and focusing on the image within it corresponds to the remembrance of God.

Yet this leads to another paradox: the deepest effacement of individuality goes hand in hand with the most perfect expression of humanity. The "friends of God," who know themselves to be nothing before the Absolute, are precisely those who most faithfully reflect the divine Names and qualities, which belong not to them but to God. This is why the great saints and sages are also exemplars of virtue, whose true foundations are the "most beautiful Names" and attributes of God. The reflections of those divine attributes shine through them most clearly because the mirrors of their hearts have been polished by the remembrance of God and the most persistent stains, those imprinted by egotism, have been removed. The creativity of the saint is raised to its highest pitch precisely because the divine qualities reflected by the heart are no longer impeded, subjectively, by the individualistic coagulations generated by egotism, nor constrained, objectively, by the cosmic coagulations of this lower world. For such saints are those whose "hearts are in the Gardens [of Paradise] while their bodies are at work." Their hearts, bound and attached to that divine realm of the abodes and stations of paradise reaching all the way to the divine presence, are already "within" that transcendent realm; they already live more in that spiritual world than in this earthly one. And so, though they labour in this world with their bodies, their outward actions veil their inward transcendence of higher realities: they act, but they are not bound by the fruits of their action.

Such souls have not merely understood this principle; they have been seized by it, existentially, at the very root of their being. It is the principle voiced in the Qur'anic verse:

وَمَا هَذِهِ ٱلْحَيَوٰةُ ٱلدُّنْيَآ إِلَّا لَهْوٌۭ وَلَعِبٌۭ ۚ وَإِنَّ ٱلدَّارَ ٱلْآخِرَةَ لَهِىَ ٱلْحَيَوَانُ ۚ لَوْ كَانُوا۟ يَعْلَمُونَ

"And the life of this world is naught but sport and play; and truly, the abode of the Hereafter, that is true life" (29:64).

Their instincts are therefore always attuned to that higher reality. When Ali (ع) was struck by the poisoned sword of Ibn Muljam, the cry that broke from him was not one of pain but of triumph: "I have triumphed, by the Lord of the Ka'ba!" At the very moment of death there was in him nothing but the remembrance of God, and the Imam passed away, it is said, with his tongue still repeating the words la ilaha illa'Llah. His death was thus consummated exactly as his life had been lived, in accordance with the wisdom of the Prophet, who, when asked which of all acts is the most meritorious, replied: "That you die while your tongue is moistened with the invocation of God."

All the rites and practices associated with the chivalric orders of Islam were traced, without exception, back to the Prophet's son-in-law, Ali (ع) ibn Abi Talib, who was thereby established as the supreme source of the virtues of futuwwa, as Muhammad Ja'far Mahjub observes in his "Chivalry and Early Persian Sufism." S. H. Nasr writes in a similar vein that Ali (ع), having received the "truth and power" of futuwwa from the Prophet, "became the supreme source of futuwwa in Islam for both Sunnis and Shi'ites... The personality of Ali, at once sage and knight, contemplative and protector of laborers and craftsmen, has continued to dominate through the centuries over the horizon of futuwwa as it has over much of Sufism." Nasr also draws attention to the organic relationship between futuwwa and the guilds, the asnaf, singular sinf, of craftsmen and artists established throughout the length and breadth of the Muslim world.

It is often said that the Naqshabandi tariqa is the one exception to this rule, tracing its line of descent from the Prophet through the first caliph, Abu Bakr, rather than through Ali (ع). But this affiliation with Abu Bakr pertains to only one of its three principal silsilas. 'Abd al-Majid b. Muhammad al-Khani, himself a Naqshabandi-Khalidi shaykh, calls the first chain (al-silsilat al-ula) the "golden chain," which begins with Ali (ع) and proceeds through the Shi'i Imams down to Ali (ع) b. Musa, then to Ma'ruf al-Karkhi and the other masters. The second chain (al-silsilatu'l-thaniya) likewise begins with Ali (ع), proceeding through Hasan al-Basri. Only the third chain, called al-silsilat al-siddiqiyya, proceeds from the Prophet to Abu Bakr (al-siddiq).
