# Guardians, Proofs, and the Limits of Praise

I turn now to the statement concerning what has been transmitted from the Imams of the family of Muhammad (ع). Our master Ja'far bin Mansour al-Yemen (رض) said, in the book of the Esoteric Nursing, commenting upon the words of God:

> أن الأرض يرثها عبادي الصالحون

The earth is inherited by My righteous servants.

By this, he taught, are meant the Imams among His servants. He said likewise concerning the words of God:

> ونريد أن نمن على الذين استضعفوا في الأرض ونجعلهم أئمة ونجعلهم الوارثين

And We wished to be gracious to those who were made weak in the land, and to make them Imams, and to make them the heirs.

By "those who were made weak" he means the descendants of Ali ibn Abi Talib. They were made weak in the land, meaning in the very person of Ali ibn Abi Talib himself, for he is the proof of Muhammad, and the earth is his likeness. And our master al-Mu'izz li Din Allah (ع) said in his supplication of Sunday:

> ثمّ نصب من دون الأساس المتم بازاء اسرافيل

Then he appointed, beneath the Foundation, the Terminus, set facing Israfil.

I mention next the stations of the Imams (عليهم السلام), their conditions, their innocence of whoever sets them in a place other than their own place, and the charge of unbelief against whoever transgresses the bounds concerning them.

Maulana Imam al-Mu'izz li Din Allah (ع) spoke in his supplication of Sunday the words already cited, appointing beneath the Foundation the Terminus, set facing Israfil. And Maulana Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) said in his supplication known as the supplication of victory and awe:

> وبالستة المأثورة وبالسبعة المنظورة

And by the six that are transmitted, and by the seven that are beheld.

And he said in it:

> وبالتسع الآيات وبالعشر الكلمات

And by the nine signs, and by the ten words.

And he said in it:

> وبالإحدى والعشرين

And by the twenty-one.

And he said in it:

> وبالسبعة الأمّاء والسبعة الخلفاء وبالسبعة الأشهاد وبالسبعة الأبدال

And by the seven Imams, and the seven successors, and the seven witnesses, and the seven substitutes.

And he (ع) said in his Four Hundred Manners:

> من تمسّك بنا لحق ومن تمسّك غير طريقنا محق

Whoever holds fast to us has joined the truth, and whoever holds fast to a way other than ours is undone.

I mention next the stations of the proofs of the Imams (عليهم السلام), their preachers, their hudud, and their followers.

Maulana Imam al-Mu'izz li Din Allah (ع) said in his supplication of Sunday:

> ونصب من دون المتّم اللاحق بازاء ميكائيل ونصب من دون اللاحق الجناح بازاء جبرئيل

And he appointed, beneath the Terminus, the After, set facing Michael; and he appointed, beneath the After, the Wing, set facing Gabriel.

Then he said:

> فكان هؤلاء الثلاثة في الأداء إلى المستجيبين عن الناطق والأساس في العالم الجسماني كما كانت الثلاثة في الأداء عن الأصلين الذين هما القلم واللوح في العالم الروحاني

So these three were charged with conveying to the respondents on behalf of the Speaker and the Foundation in the corporeal world, just as the three were charged with conveying on behalf of the two origins, which are the Pen and the Tablet, in the spiritual world.

By this he (ع) means the Grandfather (الجد), the Opener (الفتح), and the Imagination (الخيال), who are Israfil, Michael, and Gabriel. And he (ع) said in his supplication of Friday:

> وبالحدود التي هي الناطق والأساس والمتم واللاحق والجناح والمأذون والمستجيب والحجج الأثنى عشر المرتبة في الجزائر الاثنى عشر

And by the hudud, which are the Speaker, the Foundation, the Terminus, the After, the Wing, the Authorized, and the Respondent, and the twelve proofs ranked in the twelve regions.

This is as God Almighty has said:

> لوّاحة للبشر عليها تسعة عشر

Searing to mankind; over it are nineteen.

And Maulana Amir al-Mu'minin (ع) said in the supplication of victory and awe:

> وبالثمانية الحافين بعرشك يا رب العالمين

And by the eight who encircle Your Throne, O Lord of the worlds.

And he said in it:

> وبالإحدى عشر الساجدين وبالاثنى عشر المعدودين الراكعين

And by the eleven who prostrate, and by the twelve counted ones who bow.

And our master Muhammad bin Tahir (رض) said in a great supplication of his:

> وأتوسل إليك اللهم بأبوابهم وحججهم ودعاتهم ومأذونيهم ومستجيبي أدوارهم ومن ينحو نحوهم ويلوذ ملاذهم ويأتم بهم وبتابعيهم أجمعين

And I seek nearness to You, O God, by their gates, their proofs, their preachers, their authorized ones, the respondents of their cycles, whoever inclines toward them, whoever takes shelter in their shelter, whoever takes them as his guide, and by all of their followers.

And Maulana the Commander of the Believers, Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع), said in his Four Hundred Manners:

> من أراد منكم أن يعلم کیف منزلته عند الله تعالى فلينظر کیف منزلة الله منه عند الذنوب

Whoever among you wishes to know what his station is with God Almighty, let him look at what station God holds with him at the moment of sin.

And he said in it:

> المؤمن نفسه منه في تعب والناس منه في راحة

The believer keeps his own soul in toil, while the people find rest through him.

And he said in it:

> أن أهل الجنة لينظرون إلى منازل شيعتنا كما ينظر أحدكم إلى الكوكب الدرّي في السماء

The people of Paradise look upon the stations of our Shi'a as one of you looks upon a shining star in the sky.

I mention next the prohibition of exaggeration, of falling short, and of what resembles these.

Maulana Amir al-Mu'minin Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) said in his Four Hundred Manners:

> إياكم والغلو فينا قولوا إنا عباد مربوبون وقولوا في فضلنا ما شئتم

Beware of exaggeration concerning us. Say that we are servants under a Lord, and say of our excellence whatever you wish.

And he said in it:

> إذا تبين بكم الحق فلا تكونوا مدافع عجالى فإلينا يرجع الغالي وبنا يلحق المقصّر

When the truth has been made clear through you, do not be hasty defenders, for to us the exaggerator returns, and by us the one who falls short is brought up.

I mention next the commandments of the Imams (عليهم السلام) to their guardians, and the commandments of their preachers to their Shi'a.

Maulana Amir al-Mu'minin Ali ibn Abi Talib (ع) said in his Four Hundred Manners:

> من احبنا فليعمل عملنا ويستعين بالورع فانه أفضل ما يُستعان به في الدنيا والآخرة ولا تجالسوا لنا عايبا ولا تمدحوننا معلنين عند عدوّنا فيظهر حبنا ويستر بغضنا وتذلوا انفسكم عند سلطانهم ألزموا الصّدق فانه منجاة ارغبوا فيما عند الله وأطلبوا مرضاته وطاعته واصبروا عليها ما اقبح بالمؤمن أن يدخل الجنّة وهو مهنوك الستر لا تعبونا بالطلب والشفاعة لكم يوم القيامة بسبب ما قدمتم ولا تفضحوا أنفسكم عند عدؤكم يوم القيامة ولا تجعلوا أنفسكم عندهم في منزلتهم عند الله بالحقير من الدنيا تمسّكوا بما أمركم الله تعالى به فما بين أحدكم وبين أن يغتبط ويرى ما يحب الآ أن يحضره رسول الله صلى الله عليه وعلى آله وما عند الله خير وأبقى وتأتيه البشارة والله لتقرّن عينه وليحينّ لقاء الله

Whoever loves us, let him do our work and seek help through God-fearing restraint, for that is the best thing by which help is sought in this world and the next. Do not sit with one who reviles us, and do not praise us openly before our enemy, so that our love be made plain and hatred of us be concealed, and so that you humble yourselves before their authority. Cling to truthfulness, for it is deliverance. Desire what is with God, seek His good pleasure and His obedience, and be patient in that. How ugly it is for a believer to enter Paradise with his covering torn away. Do not burden us with having to plead and intercede for you on the Day of Resurrection because of what you have sent forward. Do not disgrace yourselves before your enemy on the Day of Resurrection. Do not place yourselves, in their sight, at their own station before God for the sake of some paltry thing of this world. Hold fast to what God Almighty has commanded you, for nothing stands between any one of you and his rejoicing and seeing what he loves except that the Messenger of God should come to him. What is with God is better and more lasting, and the glad tidings will reach him. By God, his eye shall be gladdened, and the meeting with God shall surely come.

And he said in it:

> إياكم والجدالِ فأنه يورث الشك

Beware of disputation, for it bequeaths doubt.

And he said in it:

> احسبوا كلامكم من أعمالكم يقلّ كلامكم الاّ في الخير

Reckon your speech as part of your deeds, and your speech will become little except in what is good.

And he said in it:

> بادروا بعمل الخير قبل أن تشغلوا عنه بغيره ليكن جل كلامكم ذكر الله عزّ وجل احذروا الذنوب فأن العبد يذنب الذنب فيحبس عنه الرزق

Hasten to do good before you are kept from it by something else. Let the greater part of your speech be the remembrance of God, the Mighty and Majestic. Guard against sins, for a servant commits a sin and thereby his provision is withheld from him.

And he said in it:

> أفضل عمل المؤمن انتظار الفرج

The best deed of the believer is awaiting the relief.

And he said in it:

> السعيد من وُعظ بغيره فاتعظ

Blessed is the one who is admonished by the case of another and takes the admonition.

I mention next the affection owed to the Imams of the family of Muhammad (ع), the desires bound up with loyalty to them, and loyalty to their preachers.

It was said in the nineteenth council of the Mustansiriya councils, may God's peace be upon its author:

> فاستمعوا الآن ما نذكره مما أمر الله به من صلة القرابة وفيها سبعة واثنى عشر فأمّا السبعة فصلة من أمر الله بصلته من قرابةٍ رسول الله صلى الله عليه وآله لقوله تعالى قل لا أسألكم عليه أجراً الا المودة في القربى وهم أئمة الدين صلوات الله عليهم وعدّتهم سبعة يترددون كأيام الجمعة

Listen now to what we mention of that which God has commanded concerning the ties of kinship, within which there are seven and twelve. As for the seven, it is the tie with those whom God commanded to be joined, from among the kin of the Messenger of God, according to the words of God: Say, I ask you no reward for it except affection toward my kin. They are the Imams of the religion, and their number is seven, recurring like the days of Friday.
