This is today's lesson. Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. Allahumma salli 'ala Sayyidina Muhammadin wa 'ala aali Sayyidina Muhammadin wa barik wa sallim (O Allah, bless our master Muhammad and the family of our master Muhammad, and grant them blessings and peace). Al-fasl al-thalith min al-bab al-awwal min al-suradiq al-thalith (The third chapter of the first section of the third pavilion). Fa-lamma ijtama'at al-arba' al-rutab fi Ibrahim, wa kana 'ala al-halat al-madhkurah min al-fadl wa al-sharaf, aqama da'watahu ila an istakhraja minha waladahu Isma'il 'alayhim al-salam. Isma'il 'alayhis salam. Wa qad kana wulida lahu Ishaq qabla mawlid Isma'il 'alayhim al-salam, 'alayhima al-salam (And when the four ranks were gathered in Ibrahim, and he was in the aforementioned state of virtue and honor, he established his mission until he brought forth from it his son, Isma'il, peace be upon them. Isma'il, peace be upon him. And Ishaq had been born to him before the birth of Isma'il, peace be upon them, peace be upon them both).

It was first stated that Janab Adam ('alayhissalatu wassalam) was a Natiq of his era. Nuh was a Natiq of his era. When Janab Ibrahim came, what did he do? He gathered Janab Adam's era and he gathered Janab Nuh's era. To call for food...

And Janab Ibrahim gathered both eras. Two thousand... He gathered the era of Janab Adam and the era of Janab Nuh. And four ranks were gathered in you. Which ones? Nabuwwah, Risalah, Wisayah, and Imamah. What does it mean to gather the eras? See, in the time of Janab Nuh, Janab Adam ('alayhissalatu wassalam), as many individuals who were gathered, who had entered the haykal of the Natiq, who had entered the haykal of the Natiq, he gathered all of them.

There are two Ibrahims. Two Ibrahims. One Ibrahim is the Natiq, alladhi waffa (who fulfilled [his covenants]). And another Ibrahim is one about whom it is said, "kana... rajulun yuqalu lahu Ibrahim" (a man called Ibrahim), it has come in the Kalam-e-Pak. Kana rajulun yuqalu lahu Ibrahim (There was a man called Ibrahim). There was a man whose name was Ibrahim. He was a Nabi. The Nabi of your time. So, upon Janab Ibrahim ('alayhissalatu wassalam), the four ranks were gathered. All the suwar of Adam's era and all the suwar of Janab Nuh's era were all gathered by him. And he was called Ibrahim alladhi waffa (Ibrahim who fulfilled [his covenants]). And where there are khilafats, the khilafats which have been further mentioned, the world of khilafats, within that, Janab Ibrahim has a special rank. Thalathaha (three of them). Who are the thalathaha? Maulana Hashim, Maulana Hunayn, Maulana Ibrahim. Janab Ibrahim, Hashim. This is a special khilafah. In the khilafats of the Qa'im ('alayhissalatu wassalam), they have a special rank. Who is the wazir of the Qa'im ('alayhissalatu wassalam)? 'Ayn 'Azim. 'Ayn 'Azim. 'Ayn 'Azim. And the ones who take the khilafah of 'Ayn 'Azimah, who are they? Mim. Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib. Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib. Then Janab Abu Talib. Then Janab... Mim. 'Abdullah. Then there are two qiran (conjunctions/peers). And after that, there is Janab Mim. Jadd al-Qa'im. Jadd al-Qa'im and Jadd... are qiran in the khilafats. They are qiran in the khilafats. And after that, what? Janab Fatimah's... after that is Janab Fatimah. They are his khalifah. Whose khalifah? Of Mim. Now after that... it is not detailed. All the mutimmin have a special rank. Mutimmin. Dawr-e-Muhammadi. Of the dawr of Muhammad ('alayhissalatu wassalam), the mutimmin. And the seventh, every seventh. Every seventh. Who are the sevenths? Janab Maulana Muhammad bin Isma'il. Then after him, Janab Ma'add al-Mu'izz. And Imam al-Tayyib ('alayhissalatu wassalam). Then the 28th, Maulana Ma'add. Maulana Ma'add ibn Husayn. Then 21st... no, 22nd Maulana Ahmad. And then... 42nd Maulana 'Ali. And the 49th is Abu al-Qa'im ('alayhissalatu wassalam). The rank of these seven is very high. But Hazrat Nasrullah Sahib quddisa sirruhu used to say that the rank of these seven is high, but the rank of the atimmah of the dawr of the Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam) became so high that a qiran occurred in comparison to the sevenths. A qiran was produced. Whose rank? The atimmah of the dawr of the Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam). The people of the first haftah (week) are of a very high rank. With them, with the seventh, a qiran was produced. Meaning both became equal. Sometimes they would take the khilafah, sometimes they would take the khilafah. A qiran was produced. And among the atimmah, the highest rank is that of Maulana Muhammad bin Isma'il. With whom a personality like Imam Husayn is gathered, what can be said of him? The rank of Maulana Muhammad bin Isma'il ('alayhissalatu wassalam) is very high. And that is why they do not fall into the category of taman sinf. His rank is established in the kashf, in the dawr-e-kashf. A very high rank. So now, what is said about these four? Qul huwa Allahu ahad, Allahu s-samad, lam yalid wa lam yulad (Say: He is Allah, the One. Allah, the Eternal Refuge. He neither begets nor is born). He says that among these seven, four are greater. Who are they? Maulana Muhammad bin Isma'il, Imam al-Tayyib. Imam al-Tayyib. Then Maulana Ahmad, then Abu al-Qa'im. Four. These four. They are the greatest. They gathered two ranks each. Maulana Muhammad bin Isma'il gathered only one rank. Maulana Imam al-Tayyib gathered two ranks. Maulana Ahmad gathered two ranks. And the upcoming Abu al-Qa'im will also gather two ranks. But even among them, the rank of Maulana Muhammad bin Isma'il is a special rank. That rank is that of sahib-e-dawr-e-kashf (the master of the era of unveiling). The rank of the dawr-e-kashf is manifest in him. And in what respect is this said? Of the Du'at... He has nutq-e-ilahi and then he has the station of the seventh. Yes? It is Abu 'Ali in the name. Sayyidna Sahib, in the response to my poems, the poems he wrote, in them is Maulana Abi 'Ali. Abi 'Ali is how he has described it. At that time, I also understood Abi 'Ali in that respect. Since Abu 'Ali has become manifest, now his writing is Abu 'Ali. Here, Nabuwwah, Risalah... Yes? The name of our Qa'im is 'Ali. 'Ali. With respect to his name, he said Abu 'Ali. ...mentioned Imamah. In most books, Nabuwwah, Risalah, Imamah and Wisayah are stated. But since the author of Anwar... Anwar is a foundational book. Most Du'at take proofs from it. They have brought Wisayah first and Imamah later. So, what is the nature of the rank? Is Wisayah first or... Wisayah is higher. Wisayah is higher.

So when the four ranks were gathered in Ibrahim, and in that mentioned state, he was of virtue and honor, he established his da'wah until he brought forth from it his son, Isma'il... peace be upon them both, Ibrahim and Isma'il. And it was that his son Ishaq had already been born to him, before this... before Maulana Isma'il. Here... The birth of Ishaq was earlier. Here... Isma'il... The printed book, what does it have? In the printed book, it's the same. Isma'il's birth was earlier. In the Sirah, Maulana Isma'il is earlier. Here, Ishaq is mentioned first. Isma'il is mentioned first. Then Ishaq is mentioned.

So Maulana Isma'il established ('alayhis salam) as Wasi. So he established Maulana Isma'il as a Wasi. And he entrusted to him the rank of Wisayah. And Imamah. By the command of Allah Ta'ala. The rank of Wisayah and Imamah. By the command of Allah Ta'ala. Because he is a maqam ilahi (divine station) and a haykal nurani (luminous temple). Because Maulana Ibrahim is a maqam ilahi and a haykal nurani. And he entrusted to his son Ishaq the rank of Nabuwwah and Risalah. And he made him a khadim (servant) before his brother Isma'il ('alayhim jami' al-salam). And he made Janab Ishaq a khadim in the service of his brother Maulana Isma'il ('alayhis salam). Peace be upon them both, all... all... peace be upon them all. And a hijab (veil) upon him. And he made Janab Ishaq a hijab over Janab Isma'il. And a da'i (summoner) to him. And a caller to him. And he enjoined him... And Maulana Ibrahim enjoined Janab Ishaq to enjoin his son to know the station of Isma'il, and all his progeny. And that the preceding one should enjoin the succeeding one until the time of the rising of their Qa'im. And Ibrahim passed away to the abode of Allah's generosity. And his son Isma'il stood after him, as a Wasi in his station, mustatiran (concealed). And Ishaq stood as his zahir (manifest) hujjah (proof) and a hijab, until the passing of Isma'il drew near. And he entrusted to his son Qaydar the Imamah and the Wisayah. Janab Isma'il entrusted to his son Qaydar the Imamah and the Wisayah. He has written Imamah and Wisayah. On this side it is... Wisayah and... And it continued in succession in the progeny of Qaydar from father to son, as we will clarify, in sha Allahu ta'ala (if God wills). And Ishaq entrusted to his son Ya'qub his rank. And this rank continued to be transferred among them... And Ishaq entrusted to his son Ya'qub his rank. And this rank, which is the rank of the Du'at, continued to be transferred among them until the Qa'im of the progeny of Isma'il received it, as we will clarify, in sha Allahu ta'ala (if God wills). But he didn't mention Lut. Yes. He didn't mention Hazrat Lut. Because Isma'il ('alayhissalatu wassalam) and his progeny ('alayhimussalam) are maqamat ilahiyyah (divine stations), dhu hayakil nuraniyyah (possessors of luminous temples), because they are ahl al-istiqrar (the people of permanence). And Ishaq and his progeny ('alayhimussalam) are hujaj (proofs) and du'at zahirun (manifest summoners). Manifest for Isma'il and his progeny ('alayhimussalam). Manifest... by way of Isma'il and his progeny. Peace be upon them all. And hujubun 'alayhim (veils upon them), manifest according to what the confrontations necessitated, and what the times and periods decreed. So the first of the Du'at and hujub (veils) was Ishaq, and after him Ya'qub, and after him Yusuf. And he entrusted it to Lawa, and Lawa entrusted it to his son Yahuda ibn Lawa. And he entrusted it to Ayyub ibn 'Amus, and he entrusted it to Zariq, and he entrusted it to Yunus ibn Ayyub. And he entrusted it to Shu'ayb ibn Safwan, and he entrusted it to Musa ibn 'Imran, and he entrusted it to Harun, and he entrusted it to Yusha' ibn Nun, and he entrusted it to Finhas ibn Harun, and he entrusted it to Ilyas, and he entrusted it to al-Yasa' ibn Akhtub, and he entrusted it to Shamwil ibn Hali, and he entrusted it to Dawud ibn 'Asa, and he entrusted it to Sulayman... Sulayman has also been written. And he entrusted it to Ash'iya ibn Anzaya, and he entrusted it to 'Uzayr ibn Subaya, and he entrusted it to Zakariyya, and he entrusted it to his son Yahya, and he entrusted it to Zinayal, and he entrusted it to Janab 'Isa ('alayhis salam). And he entrusted it to Sham'un, and he entrusted it to 'Abd al-Masih, and he entrusted it to Marwat al-Rahib, and he entrusted it to Sarjis, and he entrusted it to Bahira al-Rahib... And he entrusted it to Sarjis, who is Bahira al-Rahib. And these are ahl al-istida' (the people of entrustment). And these are the ones who are ahl al-istida', who are the Du'at and the hujaj, and they are from various lineages and relationships, but all of them are related back to Ishaq ('alayhimussalam). But all of them trace their lineage to Ishaq ('alayhimussalam). Peace be upon them all. Because every mustawda' is traced back to Ishaq.

Al-fasl al-rabi' (The fourth chapter)... In the era of 'Isa... in the era of 'Isa, and then the Nabuwwah of the Prophet is with you. The Nabi's Nabuwwah is also with you. Before that, Nabuwwah was with them. In the era of 'Isa, it had come. Bahira the monk. In the era of 'Isa. Then the Nabi's rank also... then again after the Prophet, Muhammad al-Mustafa sallallahu 'alayhi wa sallam's rank... It was submerged. It became submerged. Within the Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam), it became submerged. Bahira the monk... No, Bahira the monk... there's an Imam... a rank of Nabuwwah... "wa sallama 'ala Marwat al-Rahib" (and he entrusted it to Marwat the monk). He entrusted it to Marwat al-Rahib. And he to Sarjis... Bahira al-Rahib. Marwat al-Rahib entrusted it to Bahira. Nabuwwah... When the Prophet was manifested... a rank of Nabuwwah then... Ubayy ibn Ka'b took it. Ubayy ibn Ka'b.

Al-fasl al-rabi' min al-bab al-awwal. The Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam) was manifested from Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib, who was the bearer of the ranks of Imamah and Wisayah. He was manifested from them. And this Bahira the monk, from Janab 'Isa, the chain continued. The Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam) has a great distinction. The distinction is that there, two... Janab Hashim ('alayhissalatu wassalam)... Hasham al-sarid (He who crumbled bread [for the poor]). He gathered the ranks. And he gave it to Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib. The rank that he gave to Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib, he gave it completely. The four ranks he bestowed. Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib, what did he do? He divided it into two sections. One part he gave to Janab 'Abdullah, the second part he gave to Janab Abu Talib. Janab 'Abdullah got Nabuwwah, Risalah, Imamah, and Wisayah. When Janab 'Abdullah passed away, all those ranks were gathered in Janab Abu Talib. The four ranks were gathered in you. When the four ranks were gathered, you also divided those ranks in this way: you gave the part of Nabuwwah and Risalah to Janab the Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam), and you gave Imamah and Wisayah to Janab 'Ali. Since they were small, all the ranks of Imamah and Wisayah were also gathered in the Prophet. Kafalat-e-'uzma (the great guardianship). The blessing of the great guardianship was obtained. The effect of that great guardianship was so much, it was so powerful that all the mustawda'in who were there, even the mustaqarrin who were with 'Ali, all were overshadowed by him. Because that point at which Hashim's da'wah was accepted, when Janab the Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam)... it is mentioned that when the da'wah of 'Ayn occurred, the very first to affirm it were Mim. And it has been specially mentioned, in a dramatic style, how Mim showed khuzu' and khushu' (humility and submissiveness) at that time.

These Ambiya and Rusul, their chain is towards Ishaq, right? Here it says "hadhihi al-rutbah allati hiya rutbat al-du'at ila an tasallamaha qa'im walad Isma'il" (this rank, which is the rank of the Du'at, until the Qa'im of the progeny of Isma'il received it). The Qa'im of the progeny of Isma'il is Janab 'Ali. And the Qa'im of the progeny of Ishaq is Janab Nabi. But it happened with the Nabi, their [succession], not with... But when the Nabi is gathered with 'Ayn 'Azima, then he will gather them.

Al-fasl al-rabi' min al-bab al-awwal min al-suradiq al-thalith (The fourth chapter of the first section of the third pavilion). And the first of the A'immah, who are the maqamat ilahiyyah after Ibrahim ('alayhis salam), was Isma'il ibn Ibrahim. And Janab Ibrahim entrusted it to his son Qaydar, and he entrusted it to his son Nabat, and he entrusted it to his son... Sa'i. Hazrat Zainuddin Sahib quddisa sirruhu has made a chart, it is kept here. No, I can't see it. He must have taken it to Bombay, maybe. Is it in Bombay? He has a complete chart made. From the time of Janab Adam. He entrusted it to his son Ma'dhar, and he entrusted it to his son Mahshar, and he entrusted it to his son Kumayr, and he entrusted it to his son Nazal, and he entrusted it to his son Hizan, and he entrusted it to his son Dariz, and he entrusted it to his son 'Amamah, and he entrusted it to his son Badwan, and he entrusted it to his son Ra'ib, and he entrusted it to his son Mahmud, and he entrusted it to his son al-Dada', and he entrusted it to his son 'Akhut, and it is said he is 'Unuq. And he entrusted it to his son Qaswar, and he entrusted it to his son Tamah, and it is said he is Tabikh. And he entrusted it to his son Mat'am, and he entrusted it to his son Isma'il dhi al-'Awaj, and he entrusted it to his son Barat, and he entrusted it to his son Isma'il dhi al-Mutabi'... Mutabi'. Ya has come. Mutani' is here. Mutani' is also here. And he entrusted it to his son Ibrahim, who is Jami' al-Shaml (gatherer of the assembly). This Ibrahim is different. This is another Ibrahim. An Ibrahim has also come among the A'immah. Jami' al-Shaml. And he entrusted it to his son 'Antar, and he entrusted it to his son Zurayb, and he entrusted it to his son Shahdud, and he entrusted it to his son Muhsin, and he entrusted it to his son 'Illah, and he entrusted it to his son 'Aqba, and he entrusted it to his son Ra'imah, until he entrusted it to his son Muhtamil, and it is said he is Mutahalhil. And he entrusted it to his son 'Awwam, and he entrusted it to his son Mahlam, and he entrusted it to his son Shahib, and he entrusted it to his son Amin, and he entrusted it to his son 'Udad. And he, 'Udad, entrusted it to 'Udad. 'Udad bin 'Udad is famous. Who is his mutimm? Janab Musa. Janab Musa ('alayhis salam). The muqim is Janab Musa ('alayhis salam). 'Udad bin 'Udad. Between Ibrahim and Musa, there are so many A'immah.

And he entrusted it to his son 'Udad... 'Udad. And the time became binding for the manifestation of the Natiq. And the time made it binding that the Natiq should manifest. So he, Janab 'Udad, established from among his Du'at a Natiq. And that is Musa ('alayhis salam). And he is Musa ('alayhis salam). Then he entrusted it to his son 'Adnan. Then Janab 'Udad entrusted it to his son 'Adnan. And he entrusted it... his son 'Adnan to Ma'add. And Ma'add entrusted it to his son Nizar. And Nizar entrusted it to Mudar. And Mudar entrusted it to his son Ilyas. And Ilyas to his son Mudrikah. And Mudrikah to his son Khuzaymah. And the time became binding for the manifestation of a Natiq. And the time made it binding that a Natiq should manifest. So he commanded his da'i to establish 'Isa ('alayhis salam). So he commanded his da'i for the establishment of 'Isa ('alayhis salam)... for the manifestation of 'Isa. The muqim of Janab Adam is Maulana Hunayn. The muqim of Janab Nuh is Maulana Hud ('alayhissalatu wassalam). And from Hud, the lineage runs... "Min Hud Muhammadun fa-ida 'allaahu khusurahu" (From Hud is Muhammad, so when Allah singled him out...). From Janab Hud. And after that... Janab Ibrahim ('alayhissalatu wassalam)'s is Maulana Salih. And Janab Musa ('alayhis salam)'s is Janab 'Udad bin 'Udad. Janab 'Isa ('alayhis salam)'s is Janab Khuzaymah. It's from the Nabi. Hud the Nabi. Hud the Nabi. They are A'immah.

Then Khuzaymah entrusted it to his son Kinanah. And he, Kinanah, entrusted it to his son Nadr. And Nadr entrusted it to his son Malik. And Malik entrusted it to his son Fihr. And Fihr entrusted it to his son Ghalib. And Ghalib entrusted it to his son Lu'ayy. And Lu'ayy entrusted it to his son Ka'b. And he entrusted it to his son Murrah. And Murrah entrusted it to his son Kilab. And Kilab entrusted it to his son Qusayy. And Qusayy entrusted it to his son 'Abd Manaf. And 'Abd Manaf entrusted it to his son Hashim. And he entrusted it to his son 'Abd al-Muttalib. And he entrusted it... Janab Hashim entrusted it to his son Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib. And the four ranks were gathered with him. And the four ranks were gathered with you, which had been gathered with his grandfather Ibrahim ('alayhis salam). And they are Wisayah, Imamah, Nabuwwah, and Risalah. The ranks below are of the maqamat ilahi, their matter is different. This is clarifying the khilafats, the nutq-e-ilahi.

Al-fasl al-khamis min al-bab al-awwal min al-suradiq... Here it has been stated that for all the Imams of the dawr-e-kashf, the Qa'im who will manifest after a thousand years... Every thousand years... on the seventh... the seventh one... He is equal to one Imam. The one who manifests every thousand years, and then after seven thousand years one manifests, who gathers the thousand. The Qa'im, the Imam who manifests after seven thousand years, that Qa'im and these thalathaha sukra... they are qiran. Meaning the ranks of the dawr-e-sidq are very high. That happens at that time... that happens at that time when the Qa'im ('alayhissalatu wassalam), the upcoming Qa'im of the dawr, will also gather the dawr-e-kashf. The rank of tasbih. This Qa'im... What is the order of the first Qa'im? 'Asr-e-tasbih (The era of glorification). This Qa'im who will manifest, first he will be the one to gather the dawr-e-sidq. He will gather his dawr-e-sidq. Then he will also gather the dawr-e-kashf. When he gathers the dawr-e-kashf... along with the dawr-e-kashf... the seventh... the dawr-e-kashf that was before... when he gathers it, at that time the gathering that will take place in your haykal, that gathering has been mentioned. That at that time, two... will be peers. For seven thousand years... the Qa'im. And it is stated in the khilafats... Wa lamma ijtama'at hadhihi al-rutub al-arba' 'inda 'Abd al-Muttalib, kanat al-shintan minhunna mudkharatayn li-qa'im walad Isma'il, wa huma al-wisayah wa al-imamah. Wa al-shintan li-qa'im walad Ishaq, wa huma al-nabuwwah wa al-risalah (And when these four ranks were gathered with 'Abd al-Muttalib, two portions of them were reserved for the Qa'im of the progeny of Isma'il, and they are the Wisayah and the Imamah. And two portions were for the Qa'im of the progeny of Ishaq, and they are the Nabuwwah and the Risalah). And when these four ranks were gathered with Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib, two of them were mudkharatayn... joined... for the Qa'im of the progeny of Isma'il. And those two ranks are Wisayah and Imamah. Meaning Imamah and Wisayah will not be separated under any circumstances. They will be together. They won't be separated anywhere. ...to be mudkharatayn for them. Fa-kana min 'adl Allahi ta'ala wa fadlihi 'ala Muhammadin ('alayhissalatu wassalam) wa sharafihi, salawat Allahi 'alayhi, an yakuna maqaman ilahiyyan wa haykalan nuraniyyan. Wa lan yakuna dhalika illa li-man yakunu abuhu kadhalika haykalan nuraniyyan. Wa illa fa-la sabil... fa-la sabil ila dhalik (So it was from the justice of Allah the Exalted and His grace upon Muhammad, peace be upon him, and his honor, the blessings of Allah be upon him, that he should be a divine station and a luminous temple. And that will not be except for one whose father is likewise a luminous temple. Otherwise, there is no way to that). And from the justice of Allah, it is that... regarding the grace upon Muhammad ('alayhissalatu wassalam) and his honor, the blessings of Allah be upon him, that you should become a maqam ilahi and a haykal nurani. And this matter will not be except for that person whose father is also likewise a haykal nurani. Otherwise, if this is not so, then this matter will not happen. There will be no path to it. Meaning your statement is that Maulana Muhammad is a haykal nurani for this reason, that Maulana 'Abdullah is a haykal nurani. It was necessary for the Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam) to gather only the ranks of Nabuwwah and Risalah. In this respect. But when Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib, the great guardianship that he entrusted to you, for that, Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam)... so all the ranks that were gathered with Janab 'Ali in the spiritual world, he, despite being the bearer of Nabuwwah and Risalah, achieved superiority over all those ranks. He became the deputy of 'Ayn. After 'Ayn, your rank became established. So why did you receive that rank? Because you were a haykal nurani. Your father was Janab 'Abdullah, and 'Abdullah's father was Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib. This is what is being said. This gives the indication that the condition of the father and grandfather, the condition for being a haykal nurani, for the father and grandfather is necessary. But this condition is not necessary, that from the father and grandfather two children cannot be Imams. As from Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib, two children became Imams, haykal nurani. Both children can be haykal nurani. In the mustawda' is one Imam, in the mustaqarr is one. My question is that after Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib, for any Imam, this condition is not necessary that only one of their sons be an Imam. Both of their sons can be Imams. So this raises the question that Maulana 'Abdullah will also be a haykal nurani, only then can Maulana Muhammad be called a haykal nurani. So Maulana 'Abdullah, along with Maulana Abu Talib, is a haykal nurani. Here the matter of 'Ayn 'Azima is such that here a special quality has been created in 'Ayn 'Azima. The hijab of 'Ayn 'Azima, when it was manifested... 'Ali says, "ana 'abdun min 'abid Muhammad" (I am a slave from the slaves of Muhammad). I am one of Muhammad's slaves. The station of the one who is waited for is so lofty that due to it, all the ranks that Janab the Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam) had obtained of Nabuwwah and Risalah, he not only obtained them and entered upon their ten ranks, but in addition to that, the Imamah and all the Imams, all the Wasi who were gathered with Janab 'Ali, except for the rank of 'Ali, you obtained all the ranks. Right? No rank of the Qa'im remained. Illa thalathah sukra (except the three intoxicated ones). Illa thalathah sukra. And the thalathah sukra are also... they have gone to the Qa'im. There is still a connection. Qaba qawsayn aw adna (a distance of two bow lengths or nearer). Who is adna? Janab 'Abdullah. Qaba qawsayn, who is it? Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib, Janab Abu Talib. And adna? Janab 'Abdullah. This is a new point you have... in other books this has not been mentioned. This is a new... you have presented a new perspective here, that "lan yakuna dhalika illa li-man yakunu abuhu kadhalika haykalan nuraniyyan" (that will not be except for one whose father is likewise a luminous temple). That the Prophet sallallahu 'alayhi wa sallam cannot be a haykal nurani unless his father is a haykal nurani. Yes. Because here there is no istida'iyyat (entrustment-ness). Here there is fawqiyyat (superiority) over all the Imams. Due to the kafalah (guardianship). If it were istida'iyyat, then... a rank of Nabuwwah... there in 'alam-e-noor, due to that... this is... This is a condition in the madarij that if Janab 'Abdullah is an Imam haykal nurani, then the rank of Muhammad cannot be given to a son other than a haykal nurani's. It cannot be given to anyone else. A condition has been set. The Imamah... their ranks are different. The Imamah of the two is different, the rutbah is different. And it is further detailed. Just like Hasan and Husayn. Janab Sulayman, the prophet... there too, there is Imamah. Dawud and Sulayman. Fa-kana min 'Abd al-Muttalib, salamu Allahi 'alayhi, an nasaba lahu babayn yatasallamani al-suwar al-muntaqilah al-murtaqiyah min ahl da'watihi, wa ja'ala ahadahuma a'la min al-akhar. Fa-kana al-'ali mujma'an li-suwar al-mu'minin al-bulagha' wa al-hudud al-fudala'. Wa al-thani mujma'an li-suwar al-mustajibin alladhina hadduhum akhdh al-'ahd wa al-wila, al-mustaqimin 'alayhi la ghayr (So it was from 'Abd al-Muttalib, peace of Allah be upon him, that he set up for himself two gates to receive the transferred, ascending forms from the people of his mission, and he made one of them higher than the other. So the higher one was a congregation for the forms of the eloquent believers and the virtuous Hudud. And the second was a congregation for the forms of the respondents whose limit was taking the covenant and allegiance, remaining steadfast upon it and nothing else). The bab al-abwab for Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib... 'Abdullah ibn Saba. 'Abdullah ibn Saba and Hazrat Salma. Maulana Salma. Hazrat Salma belongs to Janab Hashim. The bab al-abwab, who is it? Your wife, Maulana Fatimah bint 'Amr. She is your wife. She is the babla for you. Janab Hashim appointed a bab al-abwab. The suwar gathered, and where did they become submerged? In his son. His son, Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib. Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib established a bab, who did he establish? His own wife, Fatimah bint 'Amr. She is the bab al-abwab. Where did she become submerged? In his son, Maulana Abu Talib. Janab Abu Talib. And the second bab you established, as you are saying, that is 'Abdullah ibn Saba. Their istima' took place, where did that gather? In Janab 'Abdullah. In 'Abdullah. Janab Abu Talib appointed his bab al-abwab, whom did he appoint? His wife. Janab Fatimah bint Asad. He appointed her. Where did she become submerged? Janab 'Ali's... in the qalb-e-haykal (heart of the temple) of Janab 'Ali. Janab 'Ali appointed his bab al-abwab. Whom? His wife. Janab Fatimah... No. Janab Salman-e-Farsi. His wife... Janab Salman-e-Farsi. Salman-e-Farsi. She will become the qalb-e-haykal for Imam Husayn ('alayhissalatu wassalam). The bab al-abwab of the Imam and the qalb-e-haykal are different. There is a difference between the two that should be kept in mind. Janab the Prophet ('alayhissalatu wassalam) appointed a bab al-abwab for Janab Fatimah. Who is it? Janab Hamzah. No. Janab Khadijah. Janab Khadijah. Where did she become submerged? Janab Fatimah's... In Janab Fatimah ('alayhissalatu wassalam). Janab 'Abdullah appointed a bab al-abwab. Who was it? Aminah. Janab Aminah. Where did she become submerged? In Janab Rasulullah sallallahu 'alayhi wa sallam. This thing needs to be understood. The Imam has bab al-abwab, they become the qalb-e-haykal for the son who will be the next khalifah. Becoming qalb-e-haykal is one thing, and being bab al-abwab is another. The Imam appoints his wife as the qalb... as the bab al-abwab. And she becomes submerged in his son. But the bab al-abwab... the istima' takes place... they become the qalb-e-haykal. What did you say? In the Ya Fateru prayer that we recite... Ya Fateru. Ya Fateru. Four Ya Fateru... four Fateru come. One is in the sajdah, a hundred times. In the sajdah, a hundred times. Then on the right cheek, a hundred times. Then on the left cheek, a hundred times. Then in the sajdah, 110 times. So the first sajdah is for Janab Fatimah al-Zahra. Fatimah al-Zahra. The Prophet has said, "The believer is closest to Allah the Exalted when he is in sajdah." When the bab... when the haykal is prepared, with the bab al-abwab, at that time the spiritual realities are closest to Allah Ta'ala. In the da'wah. They are closest to Allah Ta'ala. He is in sajdah. The first sajdah is Janab Fatimah al-Zahra's ('alayhissalatu wassalam). The sajdah on the right side is Janab Fatimah bint Asad. Whose mother? Maulana 'Ali's mother. And whose bab al-abwab? Janab Abu Talib's bab al-abwab. That is the right cheek. The hujjah of 'Ayn 'Azima. The hujjah of 'Ayn 'Azima is your bab, whose submersion is in Mim. This is the difference between the sajdah and the cheek. Then the third is Fatimah bint 'Amr. Who is she? Janab 'Abd al-Muttalib's wife. And the mother of Janab Abu Talib. Then the fourth sajdah, its rank is explained to be 110. Umm al-Qa'im. The mother of the Qa'im. The wife of the Qa'im. Zawjat al-Qa'im ('alayhissalatu wassalam). Her name is also Fatimah. Zawjat al-Qa'im ('alayhissalatu wassalam). 110 times. That you will be superior to the ten ranks. To this Fatimah. To these three. She will be superior to these three, but Janab Fatimah is superior to all.

So Maulana 'Abd al-Muttalib... Fazl al-khamis... Let's read it.

He said that in sajdah, seven parts of the body must touch the ground. Seven parts. So he said seven parts must touch the ground. But if a person is old, he does this. So seven parts don't touch the ground. When he goes into sajdah, seven parts... what are the seven parts? Forehead, nose, two hands, two knees, two feet. Two feet. One face is mentioned. The two hands, two knees, and the toes of the two feet. Seven. He has taken the face as one. So what is in it, their hudud will be... of Janab Fatimah and this Fatimah. Fatimah 'Ayn Ula and Fatimah 'Ayn Ukhra. Their hudud, the order of the da'wah will be complete. In it, seven limbs will be there. Seven of their jawarih. And here, there aren't seven. Only the cheek is touching. The rank is less. The rank is less.
