*...waqad yakoonu min haadhihil qabaa'is allatee hiya surun mujtami'ah fee 'uqdatayn alladhayni huma al-barzakh al-zulmaanee maa yujra 'alal nabaat fa-yakoonu summan qaatilan minhu talaaf al-maqaamaat al-shareefah kas-summi alladhee kaana sababan li-talaaf al-naatiq.* (And there may be from these vices—which are forms gathered in two knots, which are the dark isthmus—that which is made to flow upon the vegetation, so it becomes a deadly poison from which is the destruction of the noble stations, like the poison that was a cause for the destruction of the *Naatiq*). And it happens from these vices… This too can happen. *Waqad yakoonu*. Yes. This too is possible. And this too… From these vices, such forms exist which are gathered… which are forms that gather. They gather in two knots, such that they are both the *barzakh al-zulmani*. That which descends upon the vegetation (*nabat*), it becomes poison, a killer for the one who kills. From that, the noble stations are destroyed. Destruction… …is destroyed. Destruction… meaning, that is, it is destroyed, the noble stations are destroyed. Destruction means… To kill. It is killed. Death occurs. The death of the noble stations happens, like the poison such that it was the cause for the demise of the *Naatiq*, for the killing, for the death of the *Naatiq*. *Was-summu alladhee talafa minhu al-Hasan 'alayhis salaam.* (And the poison from which al-Hasan, peace be upon him, was destroyed). And from that poison, such that by it, al-Hasan 'alayhis salaam was destroyed. *Talaf* happened. In Urdu, we say *talaf hua* (he was destroyed). They were destroyed by it. *Mawlana Muslim bin Salwat, Mawlana al-Hasan bin Salwat…* and from this poison, such that by it, *Mawlana Muslim bin Salwat* and *Mawlana al-Shams bin Salwat* were destroyed. *Jamee'an*. *Jamee'an*. *Wa minhaa maa yaqa'u fil ma'aadin.* (And from it is that which falls into the minerals). *Wa yaqa'u fil ma'aadin.* And from these forms of vices, that which occurs in minerals… which occur in minerals, then they become… From them, swords, knives… and arrows. And from it are swords, and knives, and arrows. With which the noble stations are killed. Attack is carried out. Attack is carried out with it on the noble stations… whose mention has preceded. The swords with which the Imams were killed, the knife, the arrows, that is… The two knots whose forms they are, they descend. And in this… its parts take revenge. They are in the minerals. Yes, they can be in minerals or in vegetation. Who come to take revenge. *Yuftaku bihi fil maqaamaat al-shareefah al-saabiq zikruhaa.* (With which an assault is made on the noble stations whose mention has preceded). As has been mentioned before. *Li-anna haadhihil qabaa'is idhaa waqa'a minhaa 'alan nabaat kaana dhaalika al-nabaat sumoomman qaatilan li-man yaseeru ilayhi min al-maqaamaat al-shareefah al-masmoomah.* (Because these vices, when some of it falls upon vegetation, that vegetation becomes a deadly poison for those who go towards it from the poisoned noble stations). Because when those… vegetation… those vices… that which happens… when they happen, from them, on the stations, on the vegetation, then that is the vegetation… that vegetation is poisonous, deadly poison, killing, for those who reach… towards them, from the noble stations, who are poisoned. *Wa in waqa'a 'alaa ma'danin kaana minhu suyuufun wa sakaakeenu wa nisaalun lil-nabli yuqtalu bihaa man qutila min al-maqaamaat al-shareefah.* (And if it falls upon a mineral, from it come swords, knives, and arrowheads for the bow, with which are killed those who are killed from the noble stations). And if the occurrence… upon the mineral… and if it occurred on a mineral… those things come upon the mineral, then from it are swords, and knives, and arrows… arrowheads, for the bow… with which are killed… those who are killed from the noble stations. *Li-annahaa taqa'u 'alaa amthaalihaa min ma'aadin wal-nabaat al-madhmoomah al-mal'oonah.* (Because they fall upon their counterparts from the condemned and cursed minerals and vegetation). As it was said of Shimr, Shimr’s sword. The sword of Shimr, that was also described. *Li-annahaa taqa'u 'alaa amthaalihaa.* (Because they fall upon their counterparts). Because they occur… because they occur on their counterparts, from minerals and vegetation, which are condemned and cursed. *Fakullu shay'in minhaa mahfoozun li-saahibihi.* (So every thing from it is preserved for its owner). And every thing from it is preserved for its owner. It is preserved for its owner. *Wal-haafizu lahu huwa al-jaww al-zulmaanee.* (And the preserver for it is the dark atmosphere). And its preserver is the one who is in darkness. Its management continues. Its things are kept in preservation. Where to keep it, at what time to deliver it, its plans continue. So, *saahib*... protector (*muhaafiz*), what does that mean? For whom? For his… for its owner, it becomes a protector, meaning… A shield. A shield-like thing. Where is *muhaafiz*? *Mahfoozun li-saahibihi.* Meaning, it is kept safe. *Mahfooz* means it is kept. It is protected. Its protection is done so that when the one to be killed arrives, he can be killed with it. It is protected for its owner. The preserver is… The dark atmosphere. Such that they are two knots. *Bi-mashee'at al-mudabbir.* (By the will of the Planner). By will, of the Planner. *Wa moojib al-hikmah.* (And the requirement of wisdom). And by the requirement of wisdom. *Wa meezaan al-'adli lillahi ta'ala.* (And the scale of justice of Allah Ta'ala). And by Allah’s scale of justice. *Li-anna al-maqaama fee dhaalika al-'asri in kaana saahiba sayfin wa qatlin wa quwwatin wa ghalabatin kaanat suwar al-maqtooleen min al-azdaad al-saa'idat ilal 'uqdatayn al-muqtassah min dhaalika al-maqaam al-shareef.* (Because the station in that era, if he is the owner of the sword, killing, power, and dominance, then the forms of the slain from the opposites ascend to the two knots to take revenge from that noble station). Because the station… because the *maqaam*… the *Imam*… in that era… in that time, if he is the owner… if he is the owner of the sword, and killing, and power, and dominance… and killing, power, and dominance, then they are… then they are the forms of the slain, of the opposites, who are ascending towards the two knots… and they are the ones taking revenge… from that noble station. Because… *li-annahaa taseeru mu'ajjalatan.* (because it proceeds swiftly). Because it reaches… because it reaches with speed… with speed to the station of that cursed person, becoming a devil, they attack… they attack that station with killing, taking revenge… taking revenge from those… from those people… such that they had killed them. *Wa in kaana dawr al-maqaami fee dhaalika al-'asri dawra awaamirin wa nawaahin wa iqaamati hudoodin wa jaldin wa habsin wa nafyin wa maa yajree haadhal majraa kaanat suwar al-azdaad al-jaariyah 'alayhim dhaalika 'inda mawtihaa wa nazoolihaa min dhaalika al-barzakh sumoomman kamaa sabaqa fil qawl.* (And if the era of the station in that time is an era of commands and prohibitions, and establishing punishments, and flogging, and imprisonment, and exile, and what follows this course, then the forms of the opposites that are executed upon them near their death, and descend from that isthmus, are poisons, as has preceded in the discourse). And if the era of the station is in that time… an era of… of the *Imam*… *nurani*… in that era is an era… in that era, an era of commands and prohibitions. An era of commands and prohibitions, meaning, it is such a time when the Imam is manifest, giving commands, forbidding things. It is such a time. *Wa iqaamati hudoodin.* And establishing punishments. *Wa jaldin.* And *jald*, meaning… to whip them. *Jald* means to whip. Whipping, and imprisoning, and exiling, and that which… that which happens in this course, then are the forms of the opposites, which are جاری, flowing upon them… near their death, and their descent to that *barzakh*, from that *barzakh*, and their descent from it as poisons, as the discourse has preceded. And if the era of the station is in that time… that era’s… …*nurani*... In that era, an era… in that era, an era of commands and prohibitions. An era of commands and prohibitions, meaning it's a time when the Imam is manifest, giving commands, forbidding things, such a time it is. And establishing punishments, and *jald*, and *jald* means to whip them. *Jald* means whipping. Whipping, and imprisoning, and exiling, and that which is جاری happens in this course, then are the forms of the opposites, which are جاری, which are happening upon them near their death, and reaching their *barzakh*, and descending from it, and descending from it as poisons, as the discourse has preceded. Just as the Prophet and Sayyidna Ali, peace be upon him, faced opposition in various battles, those who took revenge… there was no one… In this, in that… Now, the promotions (*taraqqiyaat*) have to happen. Whose? The promotions of the gathering of Sayyidna Imam Husayn have to happen. Now, how will these promotions happen? If their wrongdoings (*ziyadati*) remain, their promotion is not possible. So, those wrongdoings which happened from the army, which was Ali's army, those who were against him… and the killing of women happened, and they were whipped, this happened, that happened, in that era. Now, its revenge has to be taken. If it's taken after that, then for that… the opposites (*azdaad*) which… they take on their own… their respective punishments (*jaza'*) which… the transgressions that happened, they should take revenge for them so that their retributions (*qisaasaat*) are complete and their further promotion can happen. It is a purification. So this planning (*tadbeer*), whose is it? That these things should come quickly? The planning is of the era, but the *jaww al-zulmaani* (dark atmosphere), the planning is through it. Its thing is protected. Through the two knots, its protection is carried out. So that too, just as… is subject to the planning. Yes. All these plans are of Allah Ta'ala, and of the Imam of the time, that the retributions should be completed. The retributions… he is the intermediary (*waasta*). That the giving and taking of retributions should be completed. This is the purpose. *Waqad yakoonu min suwari haa'ulaa'il mas'ooleen…* (And there may be from the forms of these accursed ones…). *wa minhaa shakhsun yusallimu dhaalika...* (And from it is a person who delivers that...). *wa minhaa shakhsun yusallimu dhaalika al-summa ilaa dhaalika al-maqaam al-shareef 'alayhi afdal al-salaam.* (And from them is a person who delivers that poison to that noble station, upon him be the best of peace). That… her grave was… *Yusallimu dhaalika…* And from them is that person… that person is who delivers… delivers that poison… to that noble station… upon him be the best of peace. The person who does such a thing, he too is a collection of curses. A collection of curses. He too is… from that… from that cursed form, which is gathering in the two knots. Just like the wife of Imam Hasan, 'alayhis salat was-salam, Ja'dah. She was from the same. *Wa qad yakoonu min suwari haa'ulaa'il mas'ooleen minhum la'anaatun min al-maqaamaati wal-hudood.* (And there may be from the forms of these accursed ones, curses from the stations and the punishments). And it happens… and it happens from the forms of these… from among them are curses from the stations and from the punishments… from the punishments. *Fa-yakoonu aktharuhum fee zulmihim wa 'akadu li-'adaawatihim wa shaytanatihim.* (So they are excessive in their oppression and most confirmed in their enmity and their devilry). Then they are excessive… they are excessive in their oppression… in their oppression and in confirming their enmity and their devilry. Sayyidna Amir al-Mu'minin, 'alayhis salat was-salam, had told the people of Iraq, the people of Kufa, who had committed transgressions against him and left him at the time, and gave him hardships, he cursed them, that such a person will be imposed upon you who will give you severe hardships, severe punishments. So he is saying that those curses that are… they all gathered, and it was said, where? In the two knots. And those curses, this Hajjaj… Hajjaj, who was the greatest tyrant, in him they gathered and came. Those forms came and gathered. And he committed all sorts of oppressions. *Kal-Hajjaj.* (Like al-Hajjaj). *Alladhee zahara li-ahl al-'iraaq.* (Who appeared to the people of Iraq). Who became manifest… who became manifest for the people of Iraq. *Wa awlaad al-a'immah al-mu'mineen allatee kaanat ta'lamuhu.* (And the children of the believing Imams, which she knew). *Fa-yajtami'u dhaalika...* (So that gathers...). So… having a judge… and their… like them… curses, conception, from the opposites… and from the opposites, they gathered… those things gathered… the curses and the opposites gathered… it became extremely severe… it became more severe… in harm, and in enmity for the people of Haqq. For the people of Haqq. *Wa li-jamee' al-khalq.* (And for all of creation). And for all creations. *Wa li-dhaalika...* (And for that...). And for that reason, that great calamity is a destroyer for the whole world. For the whole world. *Fa-jtama'at fee dhaalika al-barzakh al-muzlim ilaa an zaharat 'alaa ahl al-'iraaq.* (So it gathered in that dark isthmus until it manifested upon the people of Iraq). It gathered in that dark isthmus… which is the two knots… two knots… until it manifested upon the people of Iraq. So that whatever happened from his actions among them… whatever happened. *Wa ka-ibni Mahdi alladhee kaana min la'anaat al-hudood wa tasawwur al-azdaad.* (And like Ibn Mahdi, who was from the curses of the punishments and the conception of the opposites). And like… Ibn Mahdi… such that it was from the curses of the punishments, from the conception of the opposites. Such that the curses happened from the punishments. Yes? From the curses of the punishments. In the punishments, the curses that are there, on them, his conception… and the conception of the opposites, there too, such things are made. So curse is the opposite of prayer? Yes, curse. And in prayer, seeking mercy (*tarahhum*) is not permissible, but cursing is permissible. Cursing is that Allah Ta'ala may distance from His mercy. What does curse mean? Cursing means to distance. May he be distanced from the mercy of Allah Ta'ala. *Wa subbat 'alaa… Ibn Malaa'…* Ibn Mahdi… *Tasawwur al-azdaad li-ahl al-tihaamah.* (The conception of the opposites for the people of Tihamah). For the people of Tihamah. *Fa-jtama'at fee dhaalika al-barzakh.* (So it gathered in that isthmus). Then it gathered in that isthmus… In which isthmus? In the two knots. *Wa subbat 'alaa ulaa'ika al-mudillaat al-malaa'in.* (And it was poured upon those misguided, cursed ones). And they were poured upon… on the misguided ones… the cursed ones. *A'adhana Allahu min dhaalika bi-haqqi Muhammadin wa aalihit taahireen salawatullahi 'alayhim ajma'een.* (May Allah protect us from that, by the right of Muhammad and his pure progeny, may the blessings of Allah be upon them all). May Allah keep us in His protection from that… by the right of the Prophet and his pure progeny. *Al-Bab al-Khamis.* (The Fifth Chapter). This *darik* is a pair, this thing’s pair, of those who send curses. From the opposites of the two knots, that curse comes. Yes. From the conceptions of the opposites which gather in the two knots. Then, in addition to that, the curses that are done upon them, they all descend and create such people who are the worst in the world, like Hajjaj bin Yusuf al-Thaqafi. And Ibn Mahdi is mentioned. So their curses are also accepted? The curses that are there, the curses that happen, so on whom are the curses done? On those people who had given hardship to Ali. To Imam Husayn, they gave hardship. Those curses, when they take form, they descend upon the people of that era. Like Hajjaj, he didn't only torment the followers of Ali, but rather whoever came in his path, he gave them hardship, or killed them. Who accepts the curses? If we pray, then the Lord of the Time accepts. Here, who… The meaning of curse is this: *la'ana Allahu min rahmatihi* (may Allah curse him from His mercy). Before it, the forms of the opposites gather. To other forms, the forms of the opposites gather there. *La'ana Allahu min rahmatihi.* The promotion of the *awliya* also happens through this. That they have to take and give from them, that has to be completed. Just as you are the opposites, you have been commanded that the opposites are such that they do not only oppress the believers, but they let loose a flood of oppression on the entire nation. So what is it? Then Ali cursed them, saying, "Look, you are… such a person will be imposed upon you who will inflict great oppressions upon you." Not just on the believers, but… on those who had left him. *Al-Bab al-Khamis.* (The Fifth Chapter). *Al-Bab al-Khamis fee raaziq al-saadis.* (The Fifth Chapter in the Sixth Provider). A big chapter. Two, four, six, eight… Let's mention it. Three pages were read. Yes. Three pages have been read. Shall we read? *Al-Bab al-Khamis fee raaziq al-saadis wa huwa fee khamsati fusoolin. Al-fasl al-awwal minhaa.* (The Fifth Chapter in the Sixth Provider, and it is in five sections. The first section thereof). The fifth chapter in the sixth provider, which is in five sections. And the first section from it. *Wa amma ajsaamu haa'ulaa'il azdaad wa nufusuhum fa-innal nafsa al-waahid minhum 'inda mawtihi tashree'u fee jismihi wa yaseeraani shay'an waahidan.* (And as for the bodies of these opposites and their souls, indeed the single soul from among them at its death spreads throughout its body, and they both become one thing). *Wa yastaheelaan ilal turaab.* (And they both transform into dust). And the bodies of these opposites and their souls, so indeed the one soul from among them, any one of them, near its death, spreads into its body. In the believer, what happens? Their bodily parts become the soul. Here, what happens? Their soul becomes the body. The process is reversed. Sir, this… The soul spreads? Yes. Does it become smaller and then spread? The soul spreads out. So what happens? The soul spreads into the body. The soul spreads out, and it takes on a bodily form. The body doesn't grow. It spreads out. And it spreads out in such a way that the punishments of the grave are felt by him. Then in the future, the soul, no one can destroy it. It is a thing created by God. Whether the soul is bad or good, no one can bring its existence into non-existence. Now, its process has been explained, that the soul, wherever it is, will be a cause of torment for it. Until it completes its retributions, after which it will be given an invitation and it will accept the invitation. The nature of the soul will change. And they both become one thing. And they both become one thing. And they both transform into dust. *Thumma yas'adaani bukhaaran.* (Then they both ascend as vapor). They ascend as vapor. *Fa-yanzilaani mataran.* (Then they both descend as rain). And they descend as rain. *Wa yuhdithu min dhaalika al-matari al-buruqat al-muhliqat.* (And there are produced from that rain the destructive lightnings). And from that rain are produced lightnings that are destructive. *Wal-sawaa'iq al-mutlifaat.* (And the annihilating thunderbolts). And thunder that annihilates. *Wal-suyool al-mukhribat.* (And the ruinous floods). And floods that are ruinous. *Wal-barad al-mudirr.* (And the harmful hail). And hail that is harmful. *Wa dhaalika min fi'l al-muzaddaat fee jamee' al-awqaat.* (And that is from the action of the opposites in all times). And that is from the action of the opposites in all times. They continue their work. What? Their bodies and souls. The calamities that occur in the world, their effect is present in them. So the two knots also affect them, and these bodies and things also affect them. The two knots, a conception reaches them. What conception reaches the two knots? The body and soul. The body and soul, these things also… They happen. Meaning, severe cold, severe heat… *al-barad al-mudirr*, rain, floods, thunderbolts, thunder and lightning. *Wa yansabbaani ilal ardi fa-yaseeraani nabaatan wa hayawaanan.* (And they are poured upon the earth, and they become vegetation and animals). And they are poured… they descend on the earth. They descend on the whole earth. Vapors are formed, they rise, and descend upon the earth. *Wa yaseeraani nabaatan.* (And they become vegetation). And they both become… and they both become, those two… the soul and body… animal, and they take from it… who eat it, take sustenance from it… so that they get sustenance. So that he gets sustenance. *Wa yastaghriqu bihim al-'azaab al-adnaa.* (And the nearer torment is unleashed upon them). And the nearer torment is unleashed upon them. They are those two… dragons. And walking on the bridges of torment. And they are the seven dragons, from the torment of God. And Allah has kept us and His saints safe from that. So its first is the level of *rijs*. *rijs*. What did we say in *husayn*? *ra'u khunnar*. *ra', waw, 'ayn, khay, nun, nun, ra'*. *ra'u khunnar*. It is made gentle. *Wa awwaluhaa dark al-rijs.* (And its first is the level of *rijs*). So its first is the level of *rijs*. So this… this which… the vapors that form, from that, this vegetation is also formed and… it takes sustenance from that. And from that, the creatures of torment are born. The first torment that is, its description is being given. The first torment. *Wa awwaluhaa dark al-rijs.* So the first… its first level is *rijs*. *Wa huwa qamees al-bashar.* (And it is the human tunic). And it is the tunic of a human. Now our master used to say, don't say *qamees* (shirt), they would get angry. If you said *qamees*, he would say, "Don't say that, say *kurta* (tunic)." *Wa huwa qamees al-bashar.* And it is the tunic of a human. *Wa yaseeru dhaalika al-mughtadhee bihi nutfatan.* (And that consumer becomes a sperm-drop by it). Then that consumer becomes… that consumer of sustenance becomes a sperm-drop from it. The one who consumes sustenance from it becomes a *nutfah*. *Wa yartaqee ilaa rahimin fa-yakhruju min batni ummihi janeenan fee qameesin min qumus al-zanj wal-zabab wal-barbar wal-turk wa ghayrihim minal ladheena laa yasluhu mukhaatabat ahl al-haqq wa laa yanhaajoona minhaj al-rashaad.* (And it ascends to a womb and emerges from its mother's belly as a fetus in a tunic from the tunics of the Zanj, the Zabab, the Barbar, the Turk, and others like them, for whom addressing the people of truth is not suitable, nor do they follow the path of guidance). And he ascends to a womb, and emerges from his mother's belly as a fetus in a tunic from the tunics of the Zanj, and the Zabab, and the Barbar, and the Turk, and others besides them, from among those for whom it is not suitable to address the people of Haqq. It is not suitable to address the people of Haqq. And they do not walk on the path of guidance. *Wa laa yazaalu yantaqilu min qameesin ilaa qameesin ilaa an yastawfee fee kulli naw'in min haadhihi al-anwaa'i sab'eena qameesan.* (And he continues to transfer from one tunic to another until he completes seventy tunics in each type of these types). And he always remains… transferring from one tunic to another until he completes in every type from these types, seventy tunics. 490… 70,000 years. 70,000… No, it means 70 tunics in one level. Seven levels, so in this way… 490… 7 * 7 = 49. 490,000. He does not reach the whole tunic. Its method is that he reaches one tunic. It is possible that after that he may come back from the tunic. Not every person has to. A few… a very great… stubbornness, they complete all these tunics. Sir, apparently it doesn't seem like that many nations are in torment, it doesn't seem so. There are Turks, these days of course there is civilization and all. So Allah Ta'ala has concealed this in nations, that they are in torment? The ascending and descending are both gathered in one place, aren't they? Don't you think so? The ascending ones… have arrived at a single platform. Like, it has been explained before in an example that an animal… all are animals. There is a lawful animal and an unlawful animal. They are on one platform. The lawful animal is the one that is ascending. And the unlawful animal is the one that is descending. But they are on one platform. Similarly, among them too, there are Zanj, who are descending. There are… on that path, they have returned, that can also happen. Turning back. Turning back is… yes, that is, how do the manifestations happen? A thousand years were mentioned. They descend for a thousand years. Now for them, a thousand years have not been specified. But in one level, in seventy types, he wears one tunic. Like seventy levels were mentioned. 70 tunics. *Thumma kharaja min al-azdaad wal-mumtazid ilal khums al-'aks.* (Then he emerges from the opposites and the blended into the quintessence of the عكس 'reversal'). Then they emerge from the opposites… in the mixture… to *khums al-'aks*. *Wa huwa al-dark al-saanee.* (And it is the second level). And it is the second level. *ra'd*. *ray, waw, 'ayn*. *rijs*. What did we read before? What do we read in the du'a? *A'oodhu billahi min al-rijs al-najis.* *rijs*. So it is *wa huwa al-dark al-saanee al-mumaasil lil-tarkeeb al-bashariyyah wa hum al-qird wal-dubb wal-nasnaas wal-ghawl wal-'izaar wa amthaal dhaalika.* (And it is the second level, similar to the human composition, and they are the ape, the bear, the nasnas, the ghoul, the 'izaar, and the likes of that). And the second level is what is similar to the human form. And that is the monkey. So in the human form, the first tunic is human. The second is human-like, who are similar to the human form. And they are the monkey, and the bear, and the *nasnas*, and the *ghawl*, and the lizard, and various types. The *nasnas* is a creature in Arab lands, half a creature. This second one is also from *khums*. It is from *khums*. And its examples, its likes, that are human-like. *Wa yuslaku bihi fee kulli naw'in min haadhihi al-anwaa' sab'eena qameesan.* (And he is made to pass through seventy tunics in each type of these types). And they are made to pass through… they are made to pass through every type from these types, seventy tunics. *Ilaa an yastawfee jamee'ahaa.* (Until he completes all of them). Until he completes them all. *Wa huwa fee jamee'i haadhihi al-qumus al-waqtiyyah yatahaqqaqu lahu wujood al-'azaab.* (And he, in all these temporal tunics, the existence of torment is confirmed for him). And in all these temporal tunics, it is confirmed for him that he is in a state of torment. *Wa annahu waqa'a fee dhaalika mukhaalafat arbab al-haqq.* (And that he fell into that due to opposition to the lords of truth). And that he fell into that level due to opposition to the masters of truth. *Wa yaseeru 'aarifan bihim.* (And he becomes aware of them). And he becomes one who knows them. *Mutahaqqiqan lahum, 'aarifan li-ahl al-baatil alladheena wasala bihim wa waqa'a fee adraak al-'azaab.* (Confirmed for them, knowing the people of falsehood through whom he reached [this state] and fell into the levels of torment). And he becomes one who knows them, and is confirmed for them, knowing the people of falsehood through whom, due to them, he fell into the levels of torment. *Thumma yuslaku bihi fee khums…* It is pointed out to him that he sees. So it becomes known to him that this is the reason why he is in this state. He himself. Yes. Whoever is going into that level, he knows why he is going. Why he has gone. In this level of *khums*, it has been said. *Thumma yuslaku bihi fee khums al-'ars, wa huwa al-dark al-saalis wa huwa sibaa' al-barri wal-bahri.* (Then he is made to pass into the *khums al-'ars*, and it is the third level, and it is the predators of the land and the sea). And then he is made to pass into *khums al-'ars*. And that is the third level. And it is the predators of the land and sea. *Kal-usood.* (Like lions). Like lions. *Wal-numoor.* (And tigers). And tigers. *Wal-dhi'aab.* (And wolves). And wolves. *Wa amthaalu dhaalika minal sibaa' al-bahriyyah.* (And the likes of that from the predators of the sea). And its examples, like the predators of the sea. *Wa 'alal jumlah kullu dhee naabin wa mikhlabin barriyyin wa bahriyyin.* (And in sum, every creature with a canine tooth and a claw, of the land and the sea). And on the whole, every one with a canine, what do you call a canine? The one with canines. *Mikhlab*, the one with claws. Of the land or the sea. The unlawful animals, they don't have canines, they don't have claws. The unlawful animals, they have canines and claws. Canine means what? The teeth which tear and rip. And *mikhlab* is the claws like this. *Ilaa an yastawfee fee kulli naw'in min haadhihi al-anwaa' sab'eena qameesan.* (Until he completes seventy tunics in each type of these types). Until he completes in every type from these types, seventy tunics. *Wa huwa 'aalimun bimaa huwa feehi min al-'azaab, mutahaqqiqan lahu, 'aarifan li-ahl al-haqq wa ahl al-baatil.* (And he is aware of the torment he is in, confirmed for him, knowing the people of truth and the people of falsehood). And he is aware of what he is in. He is aware of what he is in, of torment, confirmed for him, knowing the people of truth and the people of falsehood. Confirmed for him, meaning he feels the torment. He feels that I am in this… Look, the bounty… he feels that this is the punishment of God. Because he sees humans, he is in the state of an animal. So Allah has given the mind that much power to him, that he understands that I am in this state for this reason. Why was this not given in the first tunic? In the human one? It has not been mentioned. *Thumma yuslaku bihi fee khums al-khars, wa huwa al-dark al-raabi', wa huwa hawaam al-barri wal-bahri kal-afaa'ee wal-hayyaat wal-'aqaarib wa ghayrihaa minal anwaa' al-laatee tushbihuhum fa-yatakhammasu fee kulli naw'in fee haadhihi al-anwaa' sab'eena qameesan.* (Then he is made to pass into *khums al-khars*, and it is the fourth level, and it is the crawling creatures of the land and the sea, like vipers, snakes, scorpions, and others from the types that resemble them, so he takes on a fifth form in every type in these types for seventy tunics). He is made to pass, you see, he is mute. He cannot speak. The animals which… in which he is mute, he cannot speak. He cannot make any sounds. In the tunic of *khums*, *wa huwa al-dark al-raabi'*. And it is the fourth level. And it is the crawling creatures of the land and sea. The whole class that crawls on the ground. Of the land and sea. Like vipers, and snakes, and scorpions, and other than them, from the types that resemble them. And they are clothed in a tunic in every type from these seventy types of tunics. *Ilaa an yastawfee jamee' dhaalika wa huwa mutahaqqiqan bimaa huwa feehi min al-'azaab, 'aarifan li-ahl al-haqq wa ahl al-baatil.* (Until he completes all of that, and he is confirmed in the torment he is in, knowing the people of truth and the people of falsehood). Until he completes them all, and he feels what he is in, of torment, knowing the people of truth and the people of falsehood. *'Aaliman annahu saara ilaa ma saara min al-'iqaab bi-mukhaalafati arbaab al-haqq wa ittibaa' ahl al-baatil.* (Knowing that he reached what he reached of punishment due to opposition to the lords of truth and following the people of falsehood). Knowing that he reached, that he reached the punishment which he reached, from the torment, by opposing the people of truth and by following the people of falsehood. *Thumma yuslaku bihi fee dark al-khums, al-musamma bil-najis wa hum tayr al-barri wal-bahri 'ala shaaqilat zawaat al-jawarih ilaa an yastawfee fee kulli naw'in minhaa sab'eena qameesan.* Then it is said that he is mute. Meaning in one tunic there is also dumbness. Yes. And then in the fifth tunic, sounds come out, like of vipers and such. No, there are sounds. But their specific speech, which is what is called human speech, is not there. There is screaming. The first is human, the second is human-like, the third is tearing and ripping, the fourth is crawling… Reptiles and amphibians. Crawling creatures. And the fifth is what is flying creatures. *Tayr al-barri wal-bahri.* (Birds of the land and the sea). Birds. Then he is made to pass through the fifth level, named *najis*. And they are the birds of the land and sea, in the form of predatory birds. Until he completes in every type from them, seventy tunics. *Wa huwa fee jamee' dhaalika mutahaqqiqan lil-'azaab alladhee laqiyahu, 'aarifan bihi, muta'alliman minhu, 'aarifan bi-ahl al-haqq wa ahl al-baatil, 'aaliman annahu saara ilaa maa saara ilayhi min al-'iqaab bi-mukhaalafati arbaab al-haqq wa ittibaa' ahl al-baatil.* (And he, in all of that, is confirmed in the torment which he has met, knowing it, learning from it, knowing the people of truth and the people of falsehood, knowing that he reached what he reached of punishment by opposing the lords of truth and following the people of falsehood). And he, in all that state, feels the punishment that has reached him, reaches him. He feels it, and he is pained by it, he knows the people of truth and the people of falsehood. He knows that he has reached where he has reached, of punishment, from the punishment, by opposing the masters of truth, and by following the people of falsehood. *Wa lawlaa ma'rifatuhu bi-dhaalika la-maa kaana lil-'azaab 'alamun wa laa lil-thawaab raahatun.* (And were it not for his knowledge of that, there would be no pain in punishment, nor any comfort in reward). And if he did not have knowledge of this matter, then for the punishment, there would be no pain, and for the reward, there would be no comfort. He feels that this punishment I have received is because of this sin I have committed. Because of these wrongdoings. All these are levels of sensation. This is... the animals that are lawful, they are separate from this whole situation? They are not in this level. Lawful animals... these levels have no connection to lawful animals. The level of lawful animals is for ascending. When they ascend, they don't come into one tunic after another. They go directly... Suppose a pigeon is slaughtered, so... it is not coming into these forms. Its part goes... its part becomes the human body. As much as of it became the human body, to that extent its salvation happened. The rest of the part... wherever it went, it has a share from that. Its part, the human body... It does not return in this same path. It returns by the lawful path. *Fa-idhaa stawfaa jamee' haadhihil khumus sulika bihi fil dark al-saadis al-musamma bil-naqs.* (So when he has completed all of these five quintessences, he is made to pass into the sixth level, named *naqs* 'deficiency'). When he completes all these quintessences, he is made to pass... he is made to pass into the sixth level, which is named *naqs*.
