(0:13 - 18:20)
Questioner says, I have made a promise to my leader and to my Imam, Ahmad bin Yusuf. What is the meaning of Kullu Shaheen? It is not the meaning of a fan, light, or a lamp. It is a form of a believer.

(18:23 - 18:47)
Where Allah has used the word Shaheen, it is a form of a believer. For example, the verse says, Allah is all-knowing, Allah is all-encompassing, Allah is all-knowing. So, the word Shaheen is a form of a believer.

(18:47 - 18:56)
This is the form of a believer. And what is here? It is the form of asaina. In asaina, the word jamaana is not used.

(18:56 - 19:05)
That we have gathered. What happens in jamaana? Bad things happen. In asaina, each form has a different nature.

(19:06 - 19:14)
And how it is different. That is, even after gathering, they will have their own individuality. They can also separate it.

(19:14 - 19:23)
For example, the imams did it. They manifested with their own forms. The imams.

(19:24 - 19:40)
So, what was the reason? If it had been gathered, it would not have been possible. But asaina was done. It was gathered in such a way that each individuality is in its place.

(19:40 - 20:53)
Questioner- What is the meaning of the word jamaana? It cannot be surrounded. It does not come in its sphere. The way in the Kalim-e-Shahadat that there are two, la ilaha is negation and illallah is proof.

(20:53 - 21:10)
In the same way, the imam has the subject of nasur-e-riya. The moment of death of a believer. Immediately after his death, as soon as he died, those riyas become aala.

(21:12 - 21:24)
The riyas that were buried become aala. The riyas that come out after the burial become aala. The aala riyas become the nawasid-e-zilliyah of the imam.

(21:26 - 21:46)
These riyas come out before his death. before his death. These riyas come out These aala riyas become nawasid-e-zilliyah of the imam.

(21:46 - 21:56)
These aala riyas come out after the burial of three days. These riyas come out after three days. These riyas come out after three days.

(21:56 - 22:29)
These riyas come out after three days. These aala riyas become nawasid-e-zilliyah It is also a tradition that the deceased person is also buried immediately after his death. It is also the instruction of the deceased person that he should not be kept for long.

(22:32 - 22:46)
These are the nawsid and nawud of the Kalim-e-Shahadat. The nafid and the isbad. The nawsid and the riyas become nawsid.

(22:46 - 40:03)
The riyas do not become nawsid immediately. The riyas have to go through ...and then they go to Mushtari, then to Shams, then to Mushtari... ...and then their main station is Kambar. The moon shines in the sky on the 14th, 13th and 14th night... It is said that it is because of these Riyadhs that they have to stay awake for a long period of time They have to stay awake for three nights These Riyadhs take place for three days So if the relatives of the one who has committed suicide They are committing Riyadh on the basis of humanity If you have to do something, do it with these three people Because I will come after a thousand years I will come after a thousand years If you have to do charity, if you have to eat, if you have to study If you have to eat, if you have to give food to someone, if you have to do charity Then do it within three days If you do it, then you will do it for Surah Sharif and Fuzlaat later I will come after a thousand years So this is the story of Riyadh And the clean Riyadhs The clean Riyadhs get down on such things For example, they get down like the letters of Shabnam And they get down on some fruit Which is not cooked Like apple and such things which are not cooked And then they eat the fruits of Imam and Imam's wife And they get down on such things Like the son of Imam is born And along with the birth of the son of Imam The Riyadh that he takes, all those Riyadhs are Riyadh They are seen Like he is drinking milk And later when the son of Imam is doing some charity So actually those Riyadhs are there So they eat Like an incident happened That the father of Imam Jafar Sajid Bab-e-Zahir He was Mufazzal bin Amal So Mufazzal bin Amal came to Imam Jafar Sajid He came Imam Jafar Sajid was eating So you said that O Allah! Please be a part of my eating So you said that Maulana, I have just come to eat So you said that What you ate What we are eating You didn't eat What we are eating You didn't eat And what you ate We don't eat So it means that What you eat You eat those Riyadhs Which Allah has created So what we eat are Riyadhs So you be a part of it This was your indication And Riyadhs are also given to Momin And when are they given to Momin? They are at the time of his ablution As soon as he says Bismillah And he breathes And the water touches his body And the water that enters his body Through his body Those are the Riyadhs And those are the Riyadhs Which reach the Momin more than the Riyadhs This is the medicine This is the way to reach the Momin This is why it is said that The Kitab-ul-Huzur Is of a very high quality As Huzur said That some things become Kaffarat For big sins They become Kaffarat One of them is Baag-ul-Huzur Or Sabarat That at the time of extreme cold You should do Wudu Or It is not wrong to do Wudu That it is very cold In fact, in terms of health When you are not feeling well To do Wudu When you are not feeling well You should do Wudu With this Baag-ul-Huzur This is the meaning In terms of cold And In terms of health When you are not feeling well You should do Wudu In that cold These Riyadhs Are there for Momin as well? Yes, for Momin Whose Riyadhs are these? These are the Riyadhs of Momin The Riyadhs of Momin Are given to him The Riyadhs of Chanda Are given to Momin And those Riyadhs Which are in the Moon The Riyadhs have left The Riyadhs have left But the Moon is still there The Riyadhs are connected to the Moon Which Is used for Wudu That is why it is said That after Wudu After Wudu It is also mentioned That after Wudu If you have water in your hand You should shake it So that If you shake it There will be a danger If you shake it An angel will be born Who will pray for you And it is also said That you should read Salwa And read Surah Al-Qadr And pray By doing this your prayers Will not be rejected It is also said In the blessings of Wudu And it is also said In the second stage When does he get The Riyadh At the time of Iftar and Sehri At the time of Sehri He gets the things And at the time of Iftar He gets the things It is also said That At the time of Sehri You should do Sehri at the last time It is not that you should do Sehri at 2 am In the night You should do Sehri at the last time And you should do Iftar early You should do Iftar early It is not that You should do Iftar after reading Salwa But you should do Iftar early Because the things you are getting Are very high things So you should do Iftar early The things you are getting Becomes a part of your body Yes, it becomes a part of the body It rises So It is not mentioned Or I did not come to read The things that become a part of the body Do they go inside the heart Do they go inside the body I did not come to read But they enter the body Like Like water Or through the breath Like He says Bismillah So after Bismillah The one who breathes He gets rid of all the bad habits These are his own bad habits No, these are his own bad habits He did not commit suicide These are the bad habits of a believer The bad habits of a believer Which are in his heart He gets these things Now Once Sayyidina Sayyidina Who was he Who was he Abu Sina Abu Sina So Ali bin Sina He was very right He was a great Hujjat So He had a student He had a student The student He used to say Even if you claim to be a believer People will not separate you You are so great You dominate everything Which part of the body You do not dominate You dominate the tip You dominate everything So You used to live in difficulty You used to not be able to answer So Once he was travelling with you And in Iran It was the time of Barbarism It was the time of Barbarism And he was travelling So as he was travelling He reached a place It was the time of Maghrib And he saw a person From far That he The snow is frozen He is breaking the snow and making water So that he can do ablution He saw So They were looking at each other So Abu Sina Abu Sina said To the student You always ask me Why don't you Claim to be a believer Even if you claim to be a believer People will not separate you So I answer him It has been 300 years That Rasool Allah Has passed away And in his Shariah What will be the effect On your holy person That you Have sacrificed your life He is breaking the snow and making water So What happened before that One night before One night before They were in a travel agency They were in a travel agency And that night When they went to sleep They were thirsty Ustad was thirsty Abu Sina was thirsty So he said to the student Give me some water So the water pot Was kept inside He had to go out And take it So he said Drink the water in the morning He said It is very cold now Drink the water in the morning So he Said to the other student You were saying That I should make a claim My effect is That I could not Make my dear student drink water And this person After 300 years Following Rasool's Shariah Is breaking the snow and making water So this was the situation So this In comparison to Nafis For example Nafis Allah Allah And Imam And Imam Have three Hijab They have three Hijab They have different Hijab They have different Hijab For example The way In Kalim e Shahadat There are three Hijab So They have three Hijab Which one is this? It is going to Nasood Nasood Tabi Nasood Zindi And Nasood Khas They are all Imam Imam Imam Hussain And Imam Hussain All the Imams Had four Hijab Whereas Imam Hassan had Two Hijab And Imam Hussain had two Hijab So In the time of Imam Hassan He had the two Highest Hijab So the Imam Who had the Highest Hijab Was the Imam Like In the past In the time of Ibrahim He was the Imam Like Qaidar, Ismail And other Imams They all had two Highest Hijab And their Prophets had Two Lowest Hijab They were of the Prophet But after Imam Hussain They had four Hijab And they were not distributed After the death of Imam Hassan So they were not distributed So they were not distributed So the first one to have four Hijab Was Imam Hussain So the first one to have four Hijab Was Imam Hussain Should I do it again? Yes, no problem It's been 40 minutes It's been 40 minutes What were you saying? So these were the three yajas of Zilli and Fas And it was being mentioned that when Maulana Hussain had four uttapis then all the Ahimmas had four uttapis Before this, Imam Hassan had two uttapis of Imamat and Wasayat And Imam Hussain had two uttapis of Adnan So you can be satisfied with Imam Hassan And in Qadeem also, Maulana Ismail had two Aala And Imam Hussain had two uttapis of Adnan So this was the situation in Qadeem But when Imam Hussain had four uttapis then all the Ahimmas had four uttapis But the first Imam who had four uttapis was Maulana Ali Zain-ul-Abideen Because Imam Hussain had two uttapis of Adnan and Aala But when Maulana Ali Zain-ul-Abideen had four uttapis then he had four uttapis of Aala That is why he is called Adam-e-Aal-e-Aba Adam was the first So he is called Adam-e-Aal-e-Aba So he is the Adam of Ahl-e-Bait Rasool also had four uttapis Rasool had four uttapis Because Rasool had two uttapis of Aala But he had four uttapis of Amanat Because after Maulana Abdul Matul he had four uttapis So he had two uttapis of Maulana Abu Talib and Adnan uttapis of Maulana Abdullah So Rasool had four uttapis of Aala So he had two uttapis of Aala and two uttapis of Imamat and two uttapis of Imamat So Rasool had four uttapis of Aala This is for Ali.

(40:06 - 40:22)
So, man kuntu maula'u fa'adha ali maula The one who had a maula, he is the maula for those ranks. This is the meaning. He collected four ranks.

(40:23 - 40:54)
And what is this? Hussain collected four of them. And what did Imam say after that? So, in those four ranks, in the Kalima-e-Shahadat, la ilaha illa Allah lil-fatin-zaheen and the one who does all the restrictions, and the one who is very strict. And when the seventh comes, that person is called very strict.

(40:55 - 41:06)
Because he has things, after the seventh Imam, all the things of the sixth Imam are collected. So, he is very strict. Now, he doesn't have to do anything.

(41:06 - 41:22)
After that, the seventh, he becomes Jami. So, he is called very strict. Al-Qa'im, the soul of the eleventh, for him, for the sixth Imam, he becomes the guardian of the soul.

(41:24 - 41:55)
And these seven ranks, in the Kalima-e-Shahadat, while writing the Kalima-e-Shahadat in the Arabic style, the place where our pen gets lost, those are the seven ranks. So, our pen stops at those seven ranks. So, the seven ranks are the places of rest, and after that, the seventh Imam, he becomes Jami.

(41:56 - 42:19)
So, he becomes the guardian. And the Imam, when we will state this, it will be lengthy. So, the Imam, Majma, Swar, Ahle, and the Majma, after the Majma, the twelve Jazeera, the Majma of the twelve Jazeera, becomes the Imam's Majma.

(42:19 - 43:30)
The Majma of the twelve Duas, becomes the Imam's Majma. After Masoor-ul-Isna-Asha, then the Shahadat-e-Hadira, the twelve letters of the Kalima-e-Shahadat, after Masoor-ul-Isna-Asha, Yes, I have come here to read the Quran. Yes, because the Shaheed is going on, so she is waiting for the Sultan to come.

(43:30 - 44:34)
Yes, yes. I have come here to read the Quran, but I think that this is the right thing to do. In the name of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful.