In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. I seek refuge in Allah from the accursed Satan. In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. And the reliance of those of firm resolve... from the lands.

Praise and glorification are for Allah alone. Praise is for Him who caused the trees of hidden knowledge and wisdom to grow in the land of the da'wah of His Awliya-e-Din. And by freeing His servants from the prison of muteness and deafness, He opened their tongues. I praise Him, and He alone is worthy of praise. And I bear witness that there is no god but Him. And may Allah send blessings upon him who is the most excellent among all the prophets, and who are the bringers and reciters of the apparent Quran. And upon your wasi and the progeny of both of them, who are more excellent than all other descendants and families. And upon our Imam of the Age, who has become... uh... an umbrella for his Shi'a. And who has provided shade from the intense heat of misguidance. O Allah, sanctify the souls of our holy du'at who were the former teachers. And from among them, single out Sulayman of the Age, and Ja'far and Muhammad with the most excellent sanctification. And from the reward of those du'at, grant us that which will make all our difficulties easy. O Allah, give support, sustain, watch over, and protect both the dā'īs of our time, Sayyidna Sulayman and Sayyidna Ibrahim 'Ālī Pīr Shān. Make the light of the lamps of their luminous da'wah even brighter. Grant us their pleasure in this world and their intercession in the hereafter. And have mercy upon our forefathers, brothers, children, and wives in this world and in the religion. And grant us a good end. O Lord of the Worlds.

Brothers in faith, you have heard the meanings up to the third juz' as explained in the book of ta'wil of the Glorious Quran, Rawd al-Mustafid. And now, listen to the meaning and ta'wil of the fourth juz'.

In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. `Lan tanālū al-birra ḥattā tunfiqū mimmā tuḥibbūn. Wa mā tunfiqū min shay'in fa-inna Allāha bihi 'alīm` (You will not attain righteousness until you spend from that which you love. And whatever you spend - indeed, Allah is Knowing of it). You can never attain virtue until you spend some of your beloved things. And whatever thing you spend, Allah knows it well. Meaning, O hudud of the da'wah, you will not be able to attain the rational souls (nufus natiqah) of the benefiting believers under your authority until you benefit them with your esoteric knowledge ('ilm-e-batin). And in this context, whatever you spend, the wasi knows it well.

From here, the ta'wil of the fourth juz' has begun. `Lan tanālū al-birra...` Allah Ta'ala wants that you cannot attain virtue until you give up your beloved things. Meaning, spend. So, regarding spending, you know that today the most beloved thing is money. Spending money in the way of Allah is much better than saving it. Whatever thing you spend, Allah knows it well. How much you are spending, how much you are saving. Allah Ta'ala is aware of all things. Meaning, now look, its meaning, this is an apparent matter, that it is about giving zakat, and zakat and fitrah etc. are there, but what is the real meaning? Meaning, O hudud of the da'wah, your subordinate benefiting believers' rational souls (nufus natiqah)... What we attain, we attain from our Hajj-e-'Ālī and from our mufīd, and from that, the intellectual form (surat-e-ilmiyyah) is created. There is one practical form (surat-e-'amali), which is that we pray namaz, and give zakat, whatever actions we are doing within these pillars. But the intellectual form (ilmi surat) is created when you learn the knowledge. Why are you doing it? Why are you praying namaz? Why are you praying two rak'ats? Why are you praying four rak'ats? If you don't know the meaning of this, then there is no benefit. You are praying, the practical form is being created. The intellectual form cannot be created until you hear its meaning.

`Kullu al-ṭa'āmi kāna ḥillan li-Banī Isrā'īl illā mā ḥarrama Isrā'īlu 'alā nafsihi min qabli an tunazzala al-Tawrāt. Qul fa'tū bi-al-Tawrāt fatlūhā in kuntum ṣādiqīn` (All food was lawful to the Children of Israel except what Israel had made unlawful to himself before the Torah was revealed. Say, "So bring the Torah and recite it, if you should be truthful."). Every kind of food was made lawful for the Children of Israel, except for that which Israel, meaning Ya'qub, had made unlawful for himself before the Torah was revealed. Say, bring the Torah, and if you are truthful, then prove it by reading it. Meaning, to benefit from all knowledge was permissible for the people of the da'wah of the Natiq. Except for that knowledge which the Natiq (peace be upon him) had forbidden from being told before his hujjah abrogated the apparent shari'ah, meaning the Torah. And then the Prophet was commanded to say to these opponents of the wasi, that if you claim that you are perfect in all knowledge and are worthy of wasā'it, then at least state some of the rulings of the apparent shari'ah. Give some proof of your knowledge.

Did you understand this? That he is connecting it with the Torah etc., but what is being described is the shari'ah of the Prophet, that the wasis who claim and possess knowledge. If you are entitled to the wasā'it, then reveal it and recite some rulings of the shari'ah. And you know that after the passing of the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him), many different questions were asked by the people, the Christian community and the Jewish community, etc., who came from the Greeks and Romans. And when the answer was sought... Our Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him) had passed away, so now who is in his place? Get up, brother. So at that time, no answer was received from the three caliphs, and when 'Ali was asked, he gave the answer. In fact, there are some situations where he was asked to answer these questions, so he raised a slogan and then left, and where he was sitting, Mr. Hasan and Husayn were also there. So [he said], "These questions are ordinary, what answer should I give? My children will give it." So Hasan and Husayn were asked, and Mr. Hasan gave the answer. There are many incidents, not just one, many questions that today seem easy to us, but at that time no one was ready to answer.

`Fa-mani iftarā 'alá Allāhi al-kadhiba min ba'di dhālika fa-ūlā'ika humu al-ẓālimūn` (Then whoever invents falsehood about Allah after that - it is those who are the wrongdoers.). Then those who, after that, still fabricate lies against Allah, those people are wrongdoers. Meaning, the enemies of the wasi, even after so much clarification, they level accusations against the Messenger, saying that he removed the rightful wasi and appointed his opponent; so those people are certainly wrongdoers.

See this, they have made such an accusation against the Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him). Meaning, to accuse the elders from whom you received guidance. You were ignorant, you were polytheists. You did not believe in Allah. In Mecca, the land of Mecca was filled with ignorance. In it, light was shown, and the Prophet appeared. And to accuse them like this, the founder of Islam. And in the end, when he passed away, the Prophet passed away. Now who will lead the prayer, who will do this, who will do that? "We will just do as we please." And that's exactly what happened. And 'Umar sahib was at the forefront of everyone, and he said, "Abu Bakr sahib, extend your hand, I bring the oath of allegiance to you, I take the oath of allegiance." So all these stories happened even while the Prophet was alive, but they happened out of hypocrisy. Hypocrisy turns into opposition when that hypocrisy no longer works. And you become an opponent. So the same thing happened here, they leveled accusations against the Prophet that you are not taking the rightful heir but are doing this to someone else. This was their claim. The real reason was that they knew, as I have mentioned before, that if prophethood has come to one house, then imamate will not. "Imamate will be among us. We are the caliphs, one caliph after another." And what happened in Islam? For 1400 years there has been darkness. After the four caliphs, there is no caliph at all. Sometimes the caliph of Turkey emerges, someone like Gamal Abdel Nasser emerges, sometimes a Faisal emerges. It's going on like this. So the meaning is that they are doing it in darkness, shooting arrows in the dark. And to this day they are astray.

`Qul ṣadaqa Allāh. Fattabi'ū millata Ibrāhīma ḥanīfā. Wa mā kāna min al-mushrikīn` (Say, "Allah has told the truth. So follow the religion of Abraham, inclining toward truth, and he was not of the polytheists."). Say, Allah has spoken the truth, so you, with sincerity, follow the religion of Ibrahim. He was not among the polytheists. Meaning, say that the wasi, Wasi 'Ali, speaks the truth, is speaking the truth. That he is the rightful one. You should follow the sunnah of Hazrat Ibrahim. And accept that the imamate is received by the son after the father. And this is also the sunnah of Allah, which does not change. Whatever Ibrahim did, he did according to that sunnah. In the station of his wasi, meaning Isma'il, he did not associate anyone else.

Now look, here too, the same thing. Now, where Allah Ta'ala says that everyone's shari'ah is one. Now here, "Follow the sunnah of Ibrahim." Now it is the era of the Prophet, he is not telling them to follow the Prophet, but the sunnah of Ibrahim. So what does this mean? That among the Prophet's ancestors was Mawlana Ibrahim Khalilullah. And that same sunnah was being followed. Those are the same things. And I mentioned the day before yesterday that in the religion, Ya'qub al-Qirqisani writes that there were three shari'ahs: of Adam, Nuh, Ibrahim. They were called the 'ābā' (fathers). And after that, the 'abnā' (sons) were Musa, 'Isa, and the Prophet. So the things Musa received or, let's say, what he spread, he spread the shari'ah of Adam. And the shari'ah of Nuh was spread by 'Isa, and the shari'ah of Ibrahim was spread by the Prophet. So many things we have in our religion, meaning in the Muhammadan era, in the Muhammadan constitution, are things that Ibrahim did. Meaning, there's the matter of pledging allegiance, the matter of circumcision, there are many such major events that are from Ibrahim. Ibrahim Khalilullah, as you know, I have told you, was not just a prophet but an ulul-'azm prophet, and more than that, he had natiqiyyah, he was an ulul-'azm prophet, and `wa-ja'alna Ibrahima imama` (And We made Ibrahim an Imam). "We made Ibrahim an Imam." He had reached the rank of Imamate. And wherever Imamate has been given, they are special people; those who read the charts know who they are. This `faḍḍalnā ba'ḍahum 'alā ba'ḍ` (We have preferred some of them over others). 124,000 prophets have passed. There is Zakariyya, Yahya, Yunus, Yusuf; all the prophets have passed, but who is the most excellent among them? Who is the most excellent? The one who received risalah is greater than the prophets. The one who received natiqiyyah is greater than the messengers. The one who became an ulul-'azm prophet is greater than a natiq. And in this way, the shari'ah of our Prophet (blessings of Allah be upon him), that `akmaltu lakum dīnakum wa-atmamtu 'alaykum ni'matī` (I have perfected for you your religion and completed My favor upon you). That is the most complete religion. There was namaz in the time of Adam, there must have been in the time of Nuh, the methods may have been different; the shari'ah changes, the din (religion) does not change. The din has remained one from Adam until here, and the shari'ahs have kept changing. As the demand of the time changes, where a contradiction arises, where a break arises, then Allah Ta'ala sends a great prophet. And in this way, the continuity of the din continues. So now here too, it is said to follow the sunnah of Ibrahim. And the son who comes after his father. Now Ibrahim's son was also Isma'il, Isma'il's son was Qedar, Qedar's son was Nabat, Nabat's son was Salamah; this is all a dynasty, it has been continuing, but they are all in a hidden state. We know the names, Ishaq, Ya'qub, Yusuf, Ayyub; all these who did work in the world, they are the ones who come to the forefront. So in the daur-e-satr (period of concealment), it is the era of the prophets, not the era of the imams. The era of the imams is in kashf (unveiling). The daur-e-kashf belongs to them.

`Inna awwala baytin wuḍi'a li-n-nāsi la-lladhī bi-Bakkata mubārakan wa-hudan li-l-'ālamīn` (Indeed, the first House [of worship] established for mankind was that at Bakkah - blessed and a guidance for the worlds.). Indeed, the first house that was built for humans is certainly the one which is in Mecca. Which is blessed and is a cause of guidance for all the worlds. Meaning, the first Imam who was established in this era for the da'wah is the one who was raised in the station of wasā'it. Who was helped by divine aid. And who is the one who gives guidance to the people of the da'wah.

`Fīhi āyātun bayyinātun maqāmu Ibrāhīm. Wa-man dakhalahu kāna āminā` (In it are clear signs [such as] the standing place of Abraham. And whoever enters it shall be safe.). In it are clear signs, it is the station of Ibrahim, and whoever entered it remained in safety. Meaning, in connection with this first Imam or wasi, there are many imams. Their stations are clear. They are like Ibrahim, who in his station appointed two Imams, both of whom are his sons. He made one mustawda' and the other mustaqarr. And whoever came to the truth through the da'wah of the wasi, he was saved from misguidance.

Look, here it has been explained that `wuḍi'a li-n-nās` (established for mankind)... this first house that was built in the Kaaba, why was it built? It has a purpose, and here the ta'wil explanation is that the purpose relates to 'Ali and his progeny. But what is it? By "the first house that was built," it means the first Imam, who comes at the beginning of the era; he is the purpose. The initial verse that came, that also relates to him. That is a matter of haqā'iq; it is better if we understand this ta'wil only to the extent of ta'wil.

`Wa-lillāhi 'alá an-nāsi ḥijju al-bayti mani istaṭā'a ilayhi sabīlā. Wa-man kafara fa-inna Allāha ghaniyyun 'an al-'ālamīn` (And [due] to Allah from the people is a pilgrimage to the House - for those who are able to find a way to it. But whoever disbelieves - then indeed, Allah is free from need of the worlds.). And for the sake of Allah, it is obligatory for people who have the ability to make the journey—meaning provisions for the way, safety on the path, and sustenance, food and bread for their children—to perform the Hajj. And whoever denies, then Allah is free of need from all the worlds. Regarding Hajj, the verse that has come in between, and about performing Hajj, it has been explained what things are required. You need safety on the path, you need the expenses for coming and going, and you must leave sustenance for your children. There are three or four things that are extremely necessary; without them, one should not perform Hajj. If you have them, then go.

Meaning, the former leader, who is the wise scholar, made it obligatory upon the people of the da'wah that if they have the ability to be present in the service of the wasi to acquire esoteric knowledge, they must intend to go there. By being present, they should learn every kind of blessing and knowledge and wisdom. And whoever is negligent, should know that the wasi is also free of need.

`Qul yā Ahl al-Kitāb lima takfurūna bi-āyāti Allāhi wa-Allāhu shahīdun 'alā mā ta'malūn` (Say, "O People of the Scripture, why do you disbelieve in the verses of Allah while Allah is a witness over what you do?"). Say, O People of the Scripture, why do you deny the signs of Allah? While Allah is a witness to your deeds. Meaning, O Muslims who recite the kalimah, why do you deny the rank of the wasi despite hundreds of proofs of his wasā'it? Remember, he is watching your every action and every intention and is well aware of them.

`Qul yā Ahl al-Kitāb lima taṣuddūna 'an sabīli Allāhi man āmana tabghūnahā 'iwajan wa-antum shuhadā'. Wa-mā Allāhu bi-ghāfilin 'ammā ta'malūn` (Say, "O People of the Scripture, why do you avert from the way of Allah those who believe, seeking to make it [appear] crooked, while you are witnesses? And Allah is not unaware of what you do."). Say, O People of the Scripture, why are you stopping the believers from the path of Allah? You want crookedness, although you yourselves are witnesses to the reality. And Allah is not unaware of your actions.

Meaning, O people of Islam, why are you stopping the believers, who are walking on the path of the rightful wasi, from the path of guidance? You want to create crookedness in the straight path, to take the wasā'it away from 'Ali and give it to someone else, even though you are witnesses to the event of Ghadir Khumm. At that time in Ghadir Khumm, all of them were present. And what did they say? When the Prophet said, `man kuntu mawlāhu fa-hādhā 'Alīyun mawlāhu` (Of whomsoever I am the master, 'Ali is his master). "Whosever master I was, from today 'Ali is his master." So after taking all the pledges three times, when he descended, the people standing below, all the companions were with you. And 'Ali was also standing there. So at that time they said... what did they say? `Bakhin bakhin yā Rasūl Allāh` (Congratulations, congratulations, O Messenger of Allah). "Congratulations to you, O Messenger of Allah, that you have appointed your successor." And then, standing near 'Ali, they said to 'Ali, `bakhin bakhin yā Abā al-Ḥasan` (Congratulations, congratulations, O Father of Hasan). "Father of Hasan, congratulations to you too, `aṣbaḥta mawlāya wa-mawlā kulli mu'minīn` (you have become my master and the master of all believers)," that from today you have become the master of all believers and our master as well. After making this declaration, they left from there and within three months they turned back. And when they reached there, the denial began. Just as today you will hear that to Sayyidna Sulayman sahib, he used to have letters written, he used to write letters, saying, "I accept you, I accept you." But wherever he saw that they have become weak here, the people are few, he asserted his dominance. And you heard yesterday that one was an effigy of greed, one was an effigy of envy, and one was arrogant. There were three individuals. Arrogance (kibr) is a very bad thing. Envy (hasad) is the mother of sins. And greed (hirs) is a thing. And Isma'il, who was your uncle. Just as the Prophet's uncle was spoiled. `Yukhriju al-ḥayya min al-mayyiti wa-yukhriju al-mayyita min al-ḥayy` (He brings the living out of the dead and brings the dead out of the living). The bad emerge from the good, and the good emerge from the bad. So there too, the son of a great person like 'Abd al-Muttalib was Abu Lahab. And he denied the Prophet. In the same way, Isma'il, who was the son of Yusuf, Sayyidna Yusuf's son, and Hasan's brother. But he was greedy, that all the land of Turkey and the trust should come to me. "I am the heir." So for the sake of money, he changed his religion. And he will suffer for it.

`Yā ayyuhā alladhīna āmanū in tuṭī'ū farīqan min alladhīna ūtū al-Kitāba yaruddūkum ba'da īmānikum kāfirīn` (O you who have believed, if you obey a party of those who were given the Scripture, they would turn you back, after your belief, [to being] unbelievers.). O believers, if you obey any party of the People of the Scripture, they will turn you back toward disbelief after your faith. Meaning, O followers of the wasi, if you turn toward any party of the common Muslims, then since they are all united in enmity to the wasi, they will try to remove you from the wilayat of 'Ali, and they will make you a denier of the station of the wasi like themselves.

`Wa-kayfa takfurūna wa-antum tutlā 'alaykum āyātu Allāhi wa-fīkum rasūluh. Wa-man ya'taṣim billāhi fa-qad hudiya ilā ṣirāṭin mustaqīm` (And how could you disbelieve while to you are being recited the verses of Allah and among you is His Messenger? And whoever holds firmly to Allah has [indeed] been guided to a straight path.). And why do you disbelieve while the verses of Allah are recited to you? And His Messenger is also present among you. And whoever becomes firmly attached to Allah will be guided to a firm, straight path.

Meaning, while knowing everything regarding the ranks of the wasi and the imams, and despite the command of the Messenger who is present among you in person, why do you deny the wasi? Although you know that only the one who is firmly attached to the hem of the wasi is treading on the straight and firm path.

This has happened in Islam. That Abu Bakr, these are the people who were the hudud of 'Isa. They knew everything, but knowing it, they intentionally denied it and became opponents. This is a very bad thing; some do it in ignorance, these people have gone astray knowingly.

`Yā ayyuhā alladhīna āmanū ittaqū Allāha ḥaqqa tuqātihi wa-lā tamūtunna illā wa-antum muslimūn` (O you who have believed, fear Allah as He should be feared and do not die except as Muslims [in submission to Him].). O believers, fear Allah as you should, fear Him completely. And you should never die except in a state of being Muslim.

Meaning, O reciters of the kalimah of the Messenger, fear opposing the wasi completely. And see to it that your death is in obedience and submission to him.

`Wa-'taṣimū bi-ḥabli Allāhi jamī'an wa-lā tafarraqū. Wa-dhkurū ni'mata Allāhi 'alaykum idh kuntum a'dā'an fa-allafa bayna qulūbikum fa-aṣbaḥtum bi-ni'matihi ikhwānā` (And hold firmly to the rope of Allah all together and do not become divided. And remember the favor of Allah upon you - when you were enemies and He brought your hearts together and you became, by His favor, brothers.). All together, hold the rope of Allah firmly and do not become separated. And remember the blessings of Allah upon you that you were enemies, and He created love in your hearts. So by His blessing, you became brothers.

Meaning, all together, make the wilayat of the progeny of the wasi a part of your faith, rather, the essence of your faith. Do not get scattered here and there in friendship with others. And remember the blessing of the Natiq (peace be upon him), that in the person of the wasi he granted you that blessing, through the love and following of which you, after enmity among yourselves, became united in heart and became brothers.

`Wa-kuntum 'alā shafā ḥufratin min an-nāri fa-anqadhakum minhā. Kadhālika yubayyinu Allāhu lakum āyātihi la'allakum tahtadūn` (And you were on the edge of a pit of the Fire, and He saved you from it. Thus does Allah make clear to you His verses that you may be guided.). You were on the collapsing edge of Hell. He saved you. In this way, Allah explains His signs to you so that you may receive guidance.

Meaning, your condition was such that you would jump into the fire of misguidance and darkness out of love for the enemy of the wasi and get burned. But the Natiq saved you from the destruction of confusion and misguidance. He made you recognize the ranks of his wasi and the imams so that by obeying them, you may find guidance and salvation.

[Prayers and Salutations].
Al-Fātiḥah.
[Sounds of gathering concluding].
