                                                        1. Introduction    7

learning was starting to explode. ESL provided one of the first accessible
and comprehensive introductions to the topic.
   Since ESL was first published, the field of statistical learning has con-
tinued to flourish. The field’s expansion has taken two forms. The most
obvious growth has involved the development of new and improved statis-
tical learning approaches aimed at answering a range of scientific questions
across a number of fields. However, the field of statistical learning has
also expanded its audience. In the 1990s, increases in computational power
generated a surge of interest in the field from non-statisticians who were
eager to use cutting-edge statistical tools to analyze their data. Unfortu-
nately, the highly technical nature of these approaches meant that the user
community remained primarily restricted to experts in statistics, computer
science, and related fields with the training (and time) to understand and
implement them.
   In recent years, new and improved software packages have significantly
eased the implementation burden for many statistical learning methods.
At the same time, there has been growing recognition across a number of
fields, from business to health care to genetics to the social sciences and
beyond, that statistical learning is a powerful tool with important practical
applications. As a result, the field has moved from one of primarily academic
interest to a mainstream discipline, with an enormous potential audience.
This trend will surely continue with the increasing availability of enormous
quantities of data and the software to analyze it.
   The purpose of An Introduction to Statistical Learning (ISL) is to facili-
tate the transition of statistical learning from an academic to a mainstream
field. ISL is not intended to replace ESL, which is a far more comprehen-
sive text both in terms of the number of approaches considered and the
depth to which they are explored. We consider ESL to be an important
companion for professionals (with graduate degrees in statistics, machine
learning, or related fields) who need to understand the technical details
behind statistical learning approaches. However, the community of users of
statistical learning techniques has expanded to include individuals with a
wider range of interests and backgrounds. Therefore, there is a place for a
less technical and more accessible version of ESL.
   In teaching these topics over the years, we have discovered that they are
of interest to master’s and PhD students in fields as disparate as business
administration, biology, and computer science, as well as to quantitatively-
oriented upper-division undergraduates. It is important for this diverse
group to be able to understand the models, intuitions, and strengths and
weaknesses of the various approaches. But for this audience, many of the
technical details behind statistical learning methods, such as optimiza-
tion algorithms and theoretical properties, are not of primary interest.
We believe that these students do not need a deep understanding of these
aspects in order to become informed users of the various methodologies, and
8      1. Introduction

in order to contribute to their chosen fields through the use of statistical
learning tools.
   ISL is based on the following four premises.

    1. Many statistical learning methods are relevant and useful in a wide
       range of academic and non-academic disciplines, beyond just the sta-
       tistical sciences. We believe that many contemporary statistical learn-
       ing procedures should, and will, become as widely available and used
       as is currently the case for classical methods such as linear regres-
       sion. As a result, rather than attempting to consider every possible
       approach (an impossible task), we have concentrated on presenting
       the methods that we believe are most widely applicable.

    2. Statistical learning should not be viewed as a series of black boxes. No
       single approach will perform well in all possible applications. With-
       out understanding all of the cogs inside the box, or the interaction
       between those cogs, it is impossible to select the best box. Hence, we
       have attempted to carefully describe the model, intuition, assump-
       tions, and trade-oﬀs behind each of the methods that we consider.

    3. While it is important to know what job is performed by each cog, it
       is not necessary to have the skills to construct the machine inside the
       box! Thus, we have minimized discussion of technical details related
       to fitting procedures and theoretical properties. We assume that the
       reader is comfortable with basic mathematical concepts, but we do
       not assume a graduate degree in the mathematical sciences. For in-
       stance, we have almost completely avoided the use of matrix algebra,
       and it is possible to understand the entire book without a detailed
       knowledge of matrices and vectors.

    4. We presume that the reader is interested in applying statistical learn-
       ing methods to real-world problems. In order to facilitate this, as well
       as to motivate the techniques discussed, we have devoted a section
       within each chapter to R computer labs. In each lab, we walk the
       reader through a realistic application of the methods considered in
       that chapter. When we have taught this material in our courses,
       we have allocated roughly one-third of classroom time to working
       through the labs, and we have found them to be extremely useful.
       Many of the less computationally-oriented students who were ini-
       tially intimidated by R’s command level interface got the hang of
       things over the course of the quarter or semester. We have used R
       because it is freely available and is powerful enough to implement all
       of the methods discussed in the book. It also has optional packages
       that can be downloaded to implement literally thousands of addi-
       tional methods. Most importantly, R is the language of choice for
       academic statisticians, and new approaches often become available in
                                                         1. Introduction    9

      R years before they are implemented in commercial packages. How-
      ever, the labs in ISL are self-contained, and can be skipped if the
      reader wishes to use a diﬀerent software package or does not wish to
      apply the methods discussed to real-world problems.



Who Should Read This Book?
This book is intended for anyone who is interested in using modern statis-
tical methods for modeling and prediction from data. This group includes
scientists, engineers, data analysts, data scientists, and quants, but also
less technical individuals with degrees in non-quantitative fields such as
the social sciences or business. We expect that the reader will have had at
least one elementary course in statistics. Background in linear regression is
also useful, though not required, since we review the key concepts behind
linear regression in Chapter 3. The mathematical level of this book is mod-
est, and a detailed knowledge of matrix operations is not required. This
book provides an introduction to the statistical programming language R.
Previous exposure to a programming language, such as MATLAB or Python,
is useful but not required.
   The first edition of this textbook has been used as to teach master’s and
PhD students in business, economics, computer science, biology, earth sci-
ences, psychology, and many other areas of the physical and social sciences.
It has also been used to teach advanced undergraduates who have already
taken a course on linear regression. In the context of a more mathemat-
ically rigorous course in which ESL serves as the primary textbook, ISL
could be used as a supplementary text for teaching computational aspects
of the various approaches.



Notation and Simple Matrix Algebra
Choosing notation for a textbook is always a diﬃcult task. For the most
part we adopt the same notational conventions as ESL.
   We will use n to represent the number of distinct data points, or observa-
tions, in our sample. We will let p denote the number of variables that are
available for use in making predictions. For example, the Wage data set con-
sists of 11 variables for 3,000 people, so we have n = 3,000 observations and
p = 11 variables (such as year, age, race, and more). Note that throughout
this book, we indicate variable names using colored font: Variable Name.
   In some examples, p might be quite large, such as on the order of thou-
sands or even millions; this situation arises quite often, for example, in the
analysis of modern biological data or web-based advertising data.
10     1. Introduction

  In general, we will let xij represent the value of the jth variable for the
ith observation, where i = 1, 2, . . . , n and j = 1, 2, . . . , p. Throughout this
book, i will be used to index the samples or observations (from 1 to n) and
j will be used to index the variables (from 1 to p). We let X denote an
n × p matrix whose (i, j)th element is xij . That is,
                              ⎛                              ⎞
                             x11       x12        ...    x1p
                           ⎜ x21       x22        ...    x2p ⎟
                           ⎜                                 ⎟
                         X=⎜ .          ..        ..      .. ⎟ .
                           ⎝ ..          .           .     . ⎠
                                xn1    xn2        . . . xnp

For readers who are unfamiliar with matrices, it is useful to visualize X as
a spreadsheet of numbers with n rows and p columns.
   At times we will be interested in the rows of X, which we write as
x1 , x2 , . . . , xn . Here xi is a vector of length p, containing the p variable
measurements for the ith observation. That is,
                                       ⎛    ⎞
                                        xi1
                                       ⎜xi2 ⎟
                                       ⎜ ⎟
                                  xi = ⎜ . ⎟ .                               (1.1)
                                       ⎝ .. ⎠
                                          xip

(Vectors are by default represented as columns.) For example, for the Wage
data, xi is a vector of length 11, consisting of year, age, race, and other
values for the ith individual. At other times we will instead be interested
in the columns of X, which we write as x1 , x2 , . . . , xp . Each is a vector of
length n. That is,
                                    ⎛ ⎞
                                      x1j
                                    ⎜ x2j ⎟
                                    ⎜ ⎟
                               xj = ⎜ . ⎟ .
                                    ⎝ .. ⎠
                                          xnj

For example, for the Wage data, x1 contains the n = 3,000 values for year.
  Using this notation, the matrix X can be written as
                              '                            (
                           X = x1      x2     ···        xp ,

or
                                      ⎛ T⎞
                                       x1
                                      ⎜xT2 ⎟
                                      ⎜ ⎟
                                  X = ⎜ . ⎟.
                                      ⎝ .. ⎠
                                            xTn
                                                              1. Introduction      11

The T notation denotes the transpose of a matrix or vector. So, for example,
                            ⎛                      ⎞
                              x11 x21 . . . xn1
                            ⎜x12 x22 . . . xn2 ⎟
                            ⎜                      ⎟
                    XT = ⎜ .         ..         .. ⎟ ,
                            ⎝ ..      .          . ⎠
                              x1p x2p . . . xnp

while                           '                        (
                           xTi = xi1     xi2    ···   xip .
  We use yi to denote the ith observation of the variable on which we
wish to make predictions, such as wage. Hence, we write the set of all n
observations in vector form as
                                   ⎛ ⎞
                                     y1
                                   ⎜ y2 ⎟
                                   ⎜ ⎟
                               y = ⎜ . ⎟.
                                   ⎝ .. ⎠
                                           yn

Then our observed data consists of {(x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xn , yn )}, where
each xi is a vector of length p. (If p = 1, then xi is simply a scalar.)
  In this text, a vector of length n will always be denoted in lower case
bold ; e.g.                           ⎛ ⎞
                                        a1
                                      ⎜ a2 ⎟
                                      ⎜ ⎟
                                 a = ⎜ . ⎟.
                                      ⎝ .. ⎠
                                        an
However, vectors that are not of length n (such as feature vectors of length
p, as in (1.1)) will be denoted in lower case normal font, e.g. a. Scalars will
also be denoted in lower case normal font, e.g. a. In the rare cases in which
these two uses for lower case normal font lead to ambiguity, we will clarify
which use is intended. Matrices will be denoted using bold capitals, such
as A. Random variables will be denoted using capital normal font, e.g. A,
regardless of their dimensions.
   Occasionally we will want to indicate the dimension of a particular ob-
ject. To indicate that an object is a scalar, we will use the notation a ∈ R.
To indicate that it is a vector of length k, we will use a ∈ Rk (or a ∈ Rn if
it is of length n). We will indicate that an object is an r × s matrix using
A ∈ Rr×s .
   We have avoided using matrix algebra whenever possible. However, in
a few instances it becomes too cumbersome to avoid it entirely. In these
rare instances it is important to understand the concept of multiplying
two matrices. Suppose that A ∈ Rr×d and B ∈ Rd×s . Then the product
of A and B is denoted AB. The (i, j)th element of AB is computed by
12     1. Introduction

multiplying each element of the ith row of A )
                                             by the corresponding element
                                               d
of the jth column of B. That is, (AB)ij = k=1 aik bkj . As an example,
consider               *      +               *     +
                         1 2                    5 6
                    A=             and B =            .
                         3 4                    7 8
Then
        *        +*     + *                + *                            +
            1   2  5   6    1×5+2×7 1×6+2×8    19                      22
 AB =                    =                  =                               .
            3   4  7   8    3×5+4×7 3×6+4×8    43                      50

Note that this operation produces an r × s matrix. It is only possible to
compute AB if the number of columns of A is the same as the number of
rows of B.



Organization of This Book
Chapter 2 introduces the basic terminology and concepts behind statisti-
cal learning. This chapter also presents the K-nearest neighbor classifier, a
very simple method that works surprisingly well on many problems. Chap-
ters 3 and 4 cover classical linear methods for regression and classification.
In particular, Chapter 3 reviews linear regression, the fundamental start-
ing point for all regression methods. In Chapter 4 we discuss two of the
most important classical classification methods, logistic regression and lin-
ear discriminant analysis.
   A central problem in all statistical learning situations involves choosing
the best method for a given application. Hence, in Chapter 5 we intro-
duce cross-validation and the bootstrap, which can be used to estimate the
accuracy of a number of diﬀerent methods in order to choose the best one.
   Much of the recent research in statistical learning has concentrated on
non-linear methods. However, linear methods often have advantages over
their non-linear competitors in terms of interpretability and sometimes also
accuracy. Hence, in Chapter 6 we consider a host of linear methods, both
classical and more modern, which oﬀer potential improvements over stan-
dard linear regression. These include stepwise selection, ridge regression,
principal components regression, and the lasso.
   The remaining chapters move into the world of non-linear statistical
learning. We first introduce in Chapter 7 a number of non-linear meth-
ods that work well for problems with a single input variable. We then
show how these methods can be used to fit non-linear additive models for
which there is more than one input. In Chapter 8, we investigate tree-based
methods, including bagging, boosting, and random forests. Support vector
machines, a set of approaches for performing both linear and non-linear
classification, are discussed in Chapter 9. We cover deep learning, an ap-
proach for non-linear regression and classification that has received a lot
                                                       1. Introduction    13

of attention in recent years, in Chapter 10. Chapter 11 explores survival
analysis, a regression approach that is specialized to the setting in which
the output variable is censored, i.e. not fully observed.
  In Chapter 12, we consider the unsupervised setting in which we have
input variables but no output variable. In particular, we present princi-
pal components analysis, K-means clustering, and hierarchical clustering.
Finally, in Chapter 13 we cover the very important topic of multiple hy-
pothesis testing.
  At the end of each chapter, we present one or more R lab sections in
which we systematically work through applications of the various meth-
ods discussed in that chapter. These labs demonstrate the strengths and
weaknesses of the various approaches, and also provide a useful reference
for the syntax required to implement the various methods. The reader may
choose to work through the labs at his or her own pace, or the labs may
be the focus of group sessions as part of a classroom environment. Within
each R lab, we present the results that we obtained when we performed
the lab at the time of writing this book. However, new versions of R are
continuously released, and over time, the packages called in the labs will be
updated. Therefore, in the future, it is possible that the results shown in
the lab sections may no longer correspond precisely to the results obtained
by the reader who performs the labs. As necessary, we will post updates to
the labs on the book website.
  We use the       symbol to denote sections or exercises that contain more
challenging concepts. These can be easily skipped by readers who do not
wish to delve as deeply into the material, or who lack the mathematical
background.



Data Sets Used in Labs and Exercises
In this textbook, we illustrate statistical learning methods using applica-
tions from marketing, finance, biology, and other areas. The ISLR2 package
available on the book website and CRAN contains a number of data sets
that are required in order to perform the labs and exercises associated with
this book. One other data set is part of the base R distribution. Table 1.1
contains a summary of the data sets required to perform the labs and ex-
ercises. A couple of these data sets are also available as text files on the
book website, for use in Chapter 2.
14     1. Introduction


 Name                                       Description
 Auto            Gas mileage, horsepower, and other information for cars.
 Bikeshare       Hourly usage of a bike sharing program in Washington, DC.
 Boston          Housing values and other information about Boston census tracts.
 BrainCancer     Survival times for patients diagnosed with brain cancer.
 Caravan         Information about individuals oﬀered caravan insurance.
 Carseats        Information about car seat sales in 400 stores.
 College         Demographic characteristics, tuition, and more for USA colleges.
 Credit          Information about credit card debt for 10,000 customers.
 Default         Customer default records for a credit card company.
 Fund            Returns of 2,000 hedge fund managers over 50 months.
 Hitters         Records and salaries for baseball players.
 Khan            Gene expression measurements for four cancer types.
 NCI60           Gene expression measurements for 64 cancer cell lines.
 NYSE            Returns, volatility, and volume for the New York Stock Exchange.
 OJ              Sales information for Citrus Hill and Minute Maid orange juice.
 Portfolio       Past values of financial assets, for use in portfolio allocation.
 Publication     Time to publication for 244 clinical trials.
 Smarket         Daily percentage returns for S&P 500 over a 5-year period.
 USArrests       Crime statistics per 100,000 residents in 50 states of USA.
 Wage            Income survey data for men in central Atlantic region of USA.
 Weekly          1,089 weekly stock market returns for 21 years.
TABLE 1.1. A list of data sets needed to perform the labs and exercises in this
textbook. All data sets are available in the ISLR2 library, with the exception of
USArrests, which is part of the base R distribution.

Book Website
The website for this book is located at
                           www.statlearning.com
It contains a number of resources, including the R package associated with
this book, and some additional data sets.


Acknowledgements
A few of the plots in this book were taken from ESL: Figures 6.7, 8.3,
and 12.14. All other plots are new to this book.
2
Statistical Learning




2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?
In order to motivate our study of statistical learning, we begin with a simple
example. Suppose that we are statistical consultants hired by a client to
investigate the association between advertising and sales of a particular
product. The Advertising data set consists of the sales of that product
in 200 diﬀerent markets, along with advertising budgets for the product in
each of those markets for three diﬀerent media: TV, radio, and newspaper.
The data are displayed in Figure 2.1. It is not possible for our client to
directly increase sales of the product. On the other hand, they can control
the advertising expenditure in each of the three media. Therefore, if we
determine that there is an association between advertising and sales, then
we can instruct our client to adjust advertising budgets, thereby indirectly
increasing sales. In other words, our goal is to develop an accurate model
that can be used to predict sales on the basis of the three media budgets.
   In this setting, the advertising budgets are input variables while sales
                                                                               input
is an output variable. The input variables are typically denoted using the variable
symbol X, with a subscript to distinguish them. So X1 might be the TV output
budget, X2 the radio budget, and X3 the newspaper budget. The inputs variable
go by diﬀerent names, such as predictors, independent variables, features,
                                                                               predictor
or sometimes just variables. The output variable—in this case, sales—is
                                                                               independent
often called the response or dependent variable, and is typically denoted variable
using the symbol Y . Throughout this book, we will use all of these terms feature
interchangeably.                                                               variable
                                                                                               response
                                                                                               dependent
                                                                                               variable
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2021                      15
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-1418-1_2
16               2. Statistical Learning


        25                                            25                                        25



        20                                            20                                        20




Sales                                         Sales                                     Sales
        15                                            15                                        15



        10                                            10                                        10



        5                                             5                                         5




             0    50   100        200   300                0   10   20   30   40   50                0   20   40   60   80   100

                             TV                                      Radio                                    Newspaper




FIGURE 2.1. The Advertising data set. The plot displays sales, in thousands
of units, as a function of TV, radio, and newspaper budgets, in thousands of
dollars, for 200 diﬀerent markets. In each plot we show the simple least squares
fit of sales to that variable, as described in Chapter 3. In other words, each blue
line represents a simple model that can be used to predict sales using TV, radio,
and newspaper, respectively.



   More generally, suppose that we observe a quantitative response Y and p
diﬀerent predictors, X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp . We assume that there is some
relationship between Y and X = (X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp ), which can be written
in the very general form

                                                           Y = f (X) + ϵ.                                                    (2.1)

Here f is some fixed but unknown function of X1 , . . . , Xp , and ϵ is a random
error term, which is independent of X and has mean zero. In this formula- error term
tion, f represents the systematic information that X provides about Y .
                                                                                 systematic
   As another example, consider the left-hand panel of Figure 2.2, a plot of
income versus years of education for 30 individuals in the Income data set.
The plot suggests that one might be able to predict income using years of
education. However, the function f that connects the input variable to the
output variable is in general unknown. In this situation one must estimate
f based on the observed points. Since Income is a simulated data set, f is
known and is shown by the blue curve in the right-hand panel of Figure 2.2.
The vertical lines represent the error terms ϵ. We note that some of the
30 observations lie above the blue curve and some lie below it; overall, the
errors have approximately mean zero.
   In general, the function f may involve more than one input variable.
In Figure 2.3 we plot income as a function of years of education and
seniority. Here f is a two-dimensional surface that must be estimated
based on the observed data.
                                                                2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?                         17


                 80                                                       80

                 70                                                       70

                 60                                                       60



        Income                                                   Income
                 50                                                       50

                 40                                                       40

                 30                                                       30

                 20                                                       20


                      10   12     14   16    18      20    22                  10   12     14   16    18      20   22

                                Years of Education                                       Years of Education


FIGURE 2.2. The Income data set. Left: The red dots are the observed values
of income (in tens of thousands of dollars) and years of education for 30 indi-
viduals. Right: The blue curve represents the true underlying relationship between
income and years of education, which is generally unknown (but is known in
this case because the data were simulated). The black lines represent the error
associated with each observation. Note that some errors are positive (if an ob-
servation lies above the blue curve) and some are negative (if an observation lies
below the curve). Overall, these errors have approximately mean zero.

   In essence, statistical learning refers to a set of approaches for estimating
f . In this chapter we outline some of the key theoretical concepts that arise
in estimating f , as well as tools for evaluating the estimates obtained.


2.1.1 Why Estimate f ?
There are two main reasons that we may wish to estimate f : prediction
and inference. We discuss each in turn.

Prediction
In many situations, a set of inputs X are readily available, but the output
Y cannot be easily obtained. In this setting, since the error term averages
to zero, we can predict Y using

                                                          Ŷ = fˆ(X),                                                   (2.2)

where fˆ represents our estimate for f , and Ŷ represents the resulting pre-
diction for Y . In this setting, fˆ is often treated as a black box, in the sense
that one is not typically concerned with the exact form of fˆ, provided that
it yields accurate predictions for Y .
   As an example, suppose that X1 , . . . , Xp are characteristics of a patient’s
blood sample that can be easily measured in a lab, and Y is a variable
encoding the patient’s risk for a severe adverse reaction to a particular
18     2. Statistical Learning




            Incom
              e




                                                             ity
                      Ye                                 or
                         a                               ni
                          rs                            Se
                             ofE
                                   du
                                     ca
                                        tio
                                           n




FIGURE 2.3. The plot displays income as a function of years of education
and seniority in the Income data set. The blue surface represents the true un-
derlying relationship between income and years of education and seniority,
which is known since the data are simulated. The red dots indicate the observed
values of these quantities for 30 individuals.



drug. It is natural to seek to predict Y using X, since we can then avoid
giving the drug in question to patients who are at high risk of an adverse
reaction—that is, patients for whom the estimate of Y is high.
   The accuracy of Ŷ as a prediction for Y depends on two quantities,
which we will call the reducible error and the irreducible error. In general,
                                                                               reducible
fˆ will not be a perfect estimate for f , and this inaccuracy will introduce error
some error. This error is reducible because we can potentially improve the irreducible
accuracy of fˆ by using the most appropriate statistical learning technique to error
estimate f . However, even if it were possible to form a perfect estimate for
f , so that our estimated response took the form Ŷ = f (X), our prediction
would still have some error in it! This is because Y is also a function of
ϵ, which, by definition, cannot be predicted using X. Therefore, variability
associated with ϵ also aﬀects the accuracy of our predictions. This is known
as the irreducible error, because no matter how well we estimate f , we
cannot reduce the error introduced by ϵ.
   Why is the irreducible error larger than zero? The quantity ϵ may con-
tain unmeasured variables that are useful in predicting Y : since we don’t
measure them, f cannot use them for its prediction. The quantity ϵ may
also contain unmeasurable variation. For example, the risk of an adverse
reaction might vary for a given patient on a given day, depending on
manufacturing variation in the drug itself or the patient’s general feeling
of well-being on that day.
                                       2.1 What Is Statistical Learning?     19

  Consider a given estimate fˆ and a set of predictors X, which yields the
prediction Ŷ = fˆ(X). Assume for a moment that both fˆ and X are fixed,
so that the only variability comes from ϵ. Then, it is easy to show that

              E(Y − Ŷ )2   =    E[f (X) + ϵ − fˆ(X)]2
                            =    [f (X) − fˆ(X)]2 + Var(ϵ) ,               (2.3)
                                 ,      -.      /    , -. /
                                    Reducible       Irreducible

where E(Y − Ŷ )2 represents the average, or expected value, of the squared
                                                                            expected
diﬀerence between the predicted and actual value of Y , and Var(ϵ) repre- value
sents the variance associated with the error term ϵ.
                                                                            variance
   The focus of this book is on techniques for estimating f with the aim of
minimizing the reducible error. It is important to keep in mind that the
irreducible error will always provide an upper bound on the accuracy of
our prediction for Y . This bound is almost always unknown in practice.

Inference
We are often interested in understanding the association between Y and
X1 , . . . , Xp . In this situation we wish to estimate f , but our goal is not
necessarily to make predictions for Y . Now fˆ cannot be treated as a black
box, because we need to know its exact form. In this setting, one may be
interested in answering the following questions:
   • Which predictors are associated with the response? It is often the case
     that only a small fraction of the available predictors are substantially
     associated with Y . Identifying the few important predictors among a
     large set of possible variables can be extremely useful, depending on
     the application.
   • What is the relationship between the response and each predictor?
     Some predictors may have a positive relationship with Y , in the sense
     that larger values of the predictor are associated with larger values of
     Y . Other predictors may have the opposite relationship. Depending
     on the complexity of f , the relationship between the response and a
     given predictor may also depend on the values of the other predictors.
   • Can the relationship between Y and each predictor be adequately sum-
     marized using a linear equation, or is the relationship more compli-
     cated? Historically, most methods for estimating f have taken a linear
     form. In some situations, such an assumption is reasonable or even de-
     sirable. But often the true relationship is more complicated, in which
     case a linear model may not provide an accurate representation of
     the relationship between the input and output variables.
  In this book, we will see a number of examples that fall into the prediction
setting, the inference setting, or a combination of the two.
