Last time I had stated that regarding Hadrat Ibrahim Khalil al-Rahman, his status was not only that of a Nabi (prophet), but he also had the status of an Imam. And his father, Maulana Salih, had established him. And he himself established a Nabi and Rasul (messenger) whose name was also Ibrahim. And the Quran Majid refers to this when it says, *"rajulun yuqalu lahu Ibrahim"* (a man called Ibrahim). This was Janab Ibrahim. And you heard all his stories. And the Imam, 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam (peace and blessings be upon him), after him, raised his son, Janab Isma'il, and honored him with the Imamat. From the son of Janab Ibrahim, Janab Isma'il, then Ayyub, Ya'qub, Yusuf... this chain continued. And this continuing chain reached where? It reached Maulana Uz. A thousand years had passed. And then Allah Ta'ala said, just as a thousand years after Adam, Janab Nuh was established. And who established him? Janab Hud. And similarly, after a thousand years, Maulana Salih came, and Maulana Salih established Janab Ibrahim. And Janab Ibrahim, in his place, established whom? A Nabi whose name was also Ibrahim. In the same way, a thousand years of Janab Ibrahim 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam had passed. And the people who were performing bay'ah (pledge of allegiance) with you were very few, but those who were not performing bay'ah, who were not accepting Janab Ibrahim, who had not brought faith in the qawl (word) of Ibrahim, what was their state? They were... as it is said, *"Ma hadhihi al-tamathilu allati antum laha 'akifun"* (What are these statues to which you are devoted?). What has happened to you that you worship idols and are engaged in but-parasti (idol-worship)? Kahanat-parasti (worship of priests), but-parasti, sitara-parasti (worship of stars)... all these things and tawahhumat (delusions) were being created in great numbers. And the disease was spreading and growing. And this condition, growing and growing, made great progress in a thousand years. And the time of Hadrat Musa came. And at this time, among the offspring of Janab Ibrahim, such as Janab Isma'il... Janab Isma'il's son was Janab Finhas; he is an Imam. And Janab Ya'qub... Ishaq's two sons were Janab Ayyub, Ya'qub, etc. This is the chain of Ambiya' (prophets). This is the chain of A'immah (Imams). The chain of Imams, after Janab Isma'il, continuing... and from Finhas, continuing, reached where? Janab Uz. Alif Dal, Uz. Maulana Uz, salawatullah 'alayh (blessings of Allah be upon him), was the Imam-e-Waqt (Imam of the time). And he saw that now a time has come for me to send a Nabi-e-Mursal (sent prophet). It is necessary to send a Nabi-e-Mursal and give them a book, so that they may take that book and work in the world as a natiq nabi (speaking prophet) and perform the duties of risalat (prophethood), and establish the shari'ah. So they, Janab Uz, indicated for Janab Musa 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam, that now Janab Musa should be honored with nubuwwat (prophethood). Now, before selecting Janab Musa, it is a strange work of qudrat (divine power) that the stories of Hadrat Musa 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam himself are so vast and extensive that in the Quran Majid, if you pick up any para' (part), you will see that the story of Hadrat Musa is present. Some mention or other is there. Hadrat Musa is dominant throughout the Quran Majid. So he was so jalil al-qadr (of great stature). This means he became a prophet of very great stature and surpassed all prophets. It's not like that, but his stories are many. And the second thing was that there was great haybat (awe) in Janab Musa. His jalal (majesty) was tremendous. And for this reason, this aspect was very pleasing to Allah Ta'ala. The Lord of the Worlds narrated his stories with great detail in the Quran Majid. All the details are present in the Quran Majid. But what had happened was that this child, whose name is Musa, who was born in the house of 'Imran... his father's name was 'Imran. This son, Musa, was born to Hadrat 'Imran. And when this boy was born to them, it so happened... it so happened that at that time, the rule of the Fara'inah (Pharaohs) was in place. The rule of the Pharaohs of Egypt was ongoing. And the Fir'aun (Pharaoh) of that time, his name was Walid ibn Mus'ab. Walid ibn Mus'ab. Mus'ab was his father's name, his own name was Walid. Walid ibn Mus'ab was the king at that time. And he had a great belief and trust in nujum (astrology). As I told you, the entire nation was in misguidance. Ramal, Jafr (forms of divination), and these things that are coming to us today, this is the demand of the time. Because the era is ending, so sitr (concealment) is coming. And within sitr, fitrat (nature/disposition) is coming. Fitrat, meaning the lamp, when it is about to be extinguished, it flickers brightly before it goes out. That is our condition. Now misguidance is increasing more. So in the same way, in that era, misguidance was slowly increasing. And who was the first victim of that misguidance? The king himself. Because he had money, kingdom, treasures... he had everything. So he was the first victim. And he, Fir'aun, called the astrologers and asked, "What is the matter? Look in the stars about me, whether I will have a son or not. I have been desiring a son for a long time, but I have not had a son." They said, "O King, what desire for a son are you holding? We are seeing..." They told Fir'aun, whose name was Walid ibn Mus'ab. The astrologers told him, "O King, we are seeing that a boy will be born in your kingdom who will destroy your kingdom. He will ruin your kingdom, and such a person is coming, we are seeing this in the stars." Fir'aun became very upset. "How can this be?" So he could only think of one thing, and his advisors gave him this advice: to carry out a massacre of all the children. So he ordered a massacre, that any child born this year should be killed and finished. So, a massacre began. Whichever house had a boy, they started killing them. What can you ask of a king's command? The massacre started. The mother of Hadrat Musa became very worried. And taking permission from Janab 'Imran, she left with her child. And after leaving, she had not even named that child yet. Pay attention. She had not even named her child yet. The order was issued, and she became worried, the mother of Janab Musa. And coming, she saw that she couldn't understand what to do. So she said, "O Allah, what should I do for my child? You alone guide me." Allah Ta'ala sent a wahi (revelation) to Janab Umm-e-Musa (Mother of Moses) and said, *"an iqdhifihi fi al-yamm"* (Cast him into the river). Cast him into the Nile. O Mother of Moses, this was a wahi. To the mother of Janab Musa. So it became known that wahi also comes to the honeybee, it comes to many people, it comes to the mother of Musa. Wahi is not a special characteristic [of prophets alone]. It does come to prophets, to every prophet and messenger, but the wahi that came to you [Prophet Muhammad] was in the most excellent way. But wahi is always a divine path, a divine method. [unclear] made arrangements for the police, etc. and Janab Musa got the news of it, and he left from there. And he left straight away. And it was destined by Allah that you would become a prophet of Allah. So leaving from there, you went straight on, took another path, and went far from the palace. When you went far from the palace, there you met a person. You met a person, about whom it is said, *"wa fajadna... 'abdan min 'ibadina ataynahu... rahmatan minna... min ladunna rahmah"* (And We found a servant from among Our servants whom We had given mercy from Us). Allah Ta'ala says that they, Janab Musa, found a man from among the servants. *"fa-wajada 'abdan min 'ibadina ataynahu rahmatan min 'indina wa-'allamnahu min ladunna 'ilma"* (and he found a servant from among Our servants to whom We had given mercy from Us and had taught him knowledge from Our own presence). That We had given him mercy from Our presence and We had bestowed knowledge upon him. Now, regarding this personality, all the mufassirin (exegetes) write that it was Khidr, 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam, whom Janab Musa met. Although it has nothing to do with Khidr. Hadrat Musa... the Hudud-e-Da'wat (Ranks of the Mission) who were there, Janab Uz, who is the Imam-e-Waqt, from his da'wat (mission), he met a hadd (rank-holder). Who... Janab Musa was already a din-dar (religious person) from birth. Obviously, such a jalil al-qadr personality, how could he not be religious? He was a din-dar. As soon as you found a person who could give you some talqin (instruction), you said, "Brother, you seem to be a great scholar. Give me permission to stay with you and learn and study with you." He said, "O Musa, I... find you to be a good person. I am surely ready to keep you with me. But it seems to me, *"lan tastati'a ma'iya sabra"* (you will not be able to have patience with me). You will stay with me, but you will not be able to have patience. The things I will do, you will not be able to be patient with them." This is the incident which is narrated in detail in the Quran Majid. Now, Hadrat Musa joined him. He set a condition that he would have to be patient. He said, "I will be patient." And Musa, however, was unsuccessful in his patience. Now, he, with that hadd-e-'ali (high-ranking person), who was called Khidr, Janab Musa went. As they were going, the hadd-e-'ali who was with you, he boarded a boat. He boarded a boat. He asked, "Brother, are you traveling on the river?" He said, "Yes, I am traveling on the river." "Alright, wherever you go, I am ready to go with you." Musa joined him. And going forward, after the river journey ended, as soon as they disembarked at a place and reached the shore, they saw some children playing. Many children were playing together like this. From among them, he caught one child. Who? That hadd-e-'ali caught the child and after catching him, killed him. These are all stories from the Quran Majid. Now, as soon as he killed him, Hadrat Musa became worried. Seeing the murder, he said, "What is this? You have committed a terrible act! This child was playing, and you caught him and killed him. What is this matter?" He said, "Look, Musa, I told you before that you will not be able to be patient. And yet you objected. Although I was going to tell you everything." Now, you see. After that, he said again, *"lan tastati'a ma'iya sabra"* (you will not be able to have patience with me). You will not be able to be patient with me again. Now Musa again pleaded and said, "Keep me with you." He joined him again. They went forward. After going forward, what happened was that when they reached a place, they saw that there was a house, but it was in a dilapidated state. The wall was somewhat standing, somewhat falling. It was lying in such a state. Hadrat... Janab... Khidr, who was your hadd-e-'ali, he... ...took some clay and lime and started building the wall, placing stones. And he told Musa, "Musa, help me." He said, "Brother, if you are sitting here doing this work, neither has anyone appointed you, nor are you doing it for wages, nor do you take wages. Why are you building this after all?" He said, "Then you objected again. Now, *"hadha firaqu bayni wa baynika"* (this is the parting between me and you). Now there is parting between me and you. Now go, Musa. Your path is separate, my path is separate. You... But..." Musa said, "Brother, alright, this is the third time it has happened. Now what greater mistake can I make? It has become a very big mistake, but at least tell me why you did all this." At that time he said, "Alright, I will tell you the ta'wil (inner meaning/interpretation) of this, Musa." So look, the entire Muslim world believes that the Quran Sharif does not have a ta'wil. This is such a great story of Hadrat Musa, and qudrat (divine power) itself narrates its ta'wil. Through whose tongue? Through the tongue of Khidr. And he says, "O Musa, that boat which I damaged, it was because on its shore, there was a king who used to seize the boats of these poor people in a usurping manner and take them. And I wanted a defect to appear in it so that he would see the defect and leave it alone. So that he would not usurp their boat." "Well, that child whom I killed, you object to me that murder is for murder, and you have killed an innocent person for no reason. You think he is innocent. Hey, I know more than you. I am seeing his reality, where he has come from, where he is going, who he himself is. I am seeing all this. And Musa, you don't know, his parents are mu'min (believers). Both his parents are believers. And they have immense faith, their faith is very strong. But this child of theirs is a kafir (unbeliever). And he wants to bring his parents also towards kufr (unbelief). And the poor parents are so weak that due to his coercion, they will also spoil their faith. I am afraid of this. So, to save their faith, I said that it would be better if this kafir is finished." And I... The one who had the authority, the one who had authority with qudrat, he used that authority. Just like the case of 'Ubaydullah al-Shi'i, whom the Imam, Maulana Mahdi Billah, salawatullah 'alayh, had killed. And you then led his prayer. So that incident, I am pointing towards that, that this was a similar matter, and you killed him. "Oh," Musa said, "Is that so? This was the matter." "Well, what about that wall you raised without wages? What was that?" You said, "Look, beneath it, there was the treasure of two children." There was some capital of two orphan children, and because the wall was dilapidated, that orphan children's treasure was coming out, and people would loot it, and those poor orphan children would not get their capital. That is why I raised the wall. "So that for some time, until they become adults, the wall provides support, and they get their things." So Musa said, "If only I had that much understanding, otherwise I would have stayed with you." He said, "No, now there is no question of it. You did not have patience, and this is the result, that you must go." So, this was the limit of the tarbiyat (training) of Janab Musa, and this training was happening. And Hadrat Musa was learning this training. That you, after that, you started receiving talqin, and you continued to travel, and you started receiving intellectual things. Tawhid (monotheism) and all these things, after understanding them well, you gained a good command over tawhid. And how to practice Allah Ta'ala's tawhid and what it is... all these things, since he was to be honored with nubuwwat, he was learning all this, and he was coming under the training of Allah Ta'ala and learning the training. So during this learning process, you passed by... this is also a strange incident that happened, that you were passing through a jungle. And in your hand, there was always a thick staff ('asa). And taking that stick, you were going through the jungle, and you saw that a shepherd was sitting under a tree. And he was combing the hair of his goat with his hands. And he was saying, "O Allah Miyan, O Allah Miyan, you also come. I will also, just as I am taking out the lice from this goat, I will also take out the lice from your hair and keep them. And I also love you very much, and I will also clean you of all the lice and make you very nice and good." When Janab Musa heard this, he was very surprised. "Hey, what kind of talk is this person doing? He thinks of God like his goat. And along with that, not just a goat, but he thinks there are lice in God's hair just like in the goat's hair. And he talks about taking them out." He got into a state of jalal (majesty), Janab Musa, and taking his staff, he went and stood furiously in front of him. And started saying, "What were you saying?" First, he got scared, "Who are you?" He said, "Brother, I am asking you, what is this you are babbling? This is kufr (unbelief). Why are you... This is kufr. What kind of kufr are you babbling? And what kind of blasphemous things are you saying?" He said, "What? What I was saying, was it wrong?" He said, "It is absolutely and completely wrong. Have you understood God to be like a goat? And on top of that, you even imagine lice in his hair. What kind of thought is this?" He said, "Is Allah Miyan not like my goat?" So what happened was that in that love and affection, he was engrossed in the love of Allah. And he was one who loved Allah very much. But he tore his collar and, just as a lover runs away, he also started running. Into the jungle. "I thought, O Allah Miyan, you would also be very beloved like my goat." And his entire universe was just the goat. "But you turned out to be something else." This state that happened, that the wahi that was coming to Janab Musa... ...the grace of Allah Ta'ala that was coming, the gazes of Janab Uz that were there, and the attention that Janab Uz was giving to Janab Musa, all of that attention broke. When it stopped, Musa became worried. "What happened? The talqinat that were happening, all that was happening, the knowledge I was getting, the teacher I was getting... all this guidance... all these things have stopped. What is the matter? Why has the wahi stopped?" He became worried and then pleaded towards Allah. Now where is he turning? He is turning towards Janab Uz. "O my Master, what is the matter that there is no emanation upon me? These blessings are not upon me. What is the matter?" He said, "Musa, a servant of mine, my beloved servant, he was remembering me in some form or another." Look, here the purpose is not from Uz. Here it is from that Allah Himself. That Lord who is not there, who creates from there. "He was remembering his God in some way, but he was remembering, wasn't he? He was remembering me in some form, wasn't he? But you stopped him from that remembrance." So, this act was not pleasing to God. And the wahi to Janab Musa stopped. So, one who is absorbed in the love of Allah cannot be stopped. He was loving for the sake of Allah. He was doing it for the sake of Allah. So he was... How much was his intellect after all? O Musa, how much was his intellect? His entire capital... he was a shepherd. His entire capital, his universe, was all these goats. And he understood God to be like his goat, so what can you do? You wanted to give him such a great intellect, so what would happen? That is why the Prophet said, *"kallimu al-nasa 'ala qadri 'uqulihim"* (Speak to people according to their level of understanding). Whatever you say to people, say it according to their intellect. If you say more than their intellect, it will become a problem for them, they will not understand the burden. You will not be able to make them understand. So this was the matter of Janab Musa. And Musa was going through such experiences. Now, experiencing these things, now Musa... you were commanded by Janab Uz to go towards our Shu'ayb. You were commanded to go to Shu'ayb Nabi, by Janab Uz, the Imam of the time. And at that time, the last prophet... among the very last prophets of Hadrat Ibrahim Khalil al-Rahman was Janab Shu'ayb. And he was commanded to go towards Shu'ayb. Who? Janab Musa. Hadrat Musa 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam said, "Okay, I have been commanded to learn. I am going and I will go to Shu'ayb and learn from him." So Shu'ayb Nabi used to live in a village at one place. He reached there. As soon as he reached there... first of all, in a village, you know, when one goes to a village, there is a well (bawli) or a water-place (panghat). So there too, a well came. And as soon as he reached the well, Janab Musa thought, "Let me also drink some water." But he saw that there was a line there. Every... some girls were standing. All of them were taking their goats to make them drink water. Now, Hadrat Musa saw that two girls had been standing for a long time, but they were not getting a chance. And other people were making their goats drink water and leaving. These poor girls were just standing there. And they were in a difficult situation and not getting water. He explained to the people, and somehow got water for their goats and gave it. And both of them, those two girls, made them drink the water. Their goats. After giving them water to drink, these two girls went to their father. In reality, they were the two daughters of Janab Shu'ayb. They were the two daughters of Hadrat Shu'ayb Nabi. And both of them went to their father and started narrating, "Father, a strange incident happened today." He asked, "What's the matter? You have come very early today. What is the matter? It usually takes you a long time to water the animals, but today you have come very early." They said that such and such an incident happened. We saw a man, and due to his kindness, we were able to water them quickly, and this is what happened. So Janab Shu'ayb said, "He must be a good man, that's why you got the water quickly and so on." So the younger daughter, who was very clever, said, "Father, what's the matter that you just call him a good man and become silent? Hey, a person who is so good, he should be given a reward (ajr)." *"Hal jaza'u al-ihsani illa al-ihsan?"* (Is the reward for good [anything] but good?). It is the command of Allah Ta'ala that the reward for a good deed is a good deed. "He should get some reward for it. He did so much work for us, he should get some reward for it." This was an indication. And what did Janab Shu'ayb do? After that, he sent for Janab Musa. Hadrat Musa was also a seeker. He came and reached Janab Shu'ayb. Now when he met Shu'ayb, Janab Shu'ayb said... "I want to marry my daughter to you." Their father, Shu'ayb, saw this indication from the younger daughter and married his younger daughter to you. Now, there was no wedding here, no nikah (marriage contract), no goat, no water, no nothing, no panghat. The matter, in fact, was that this was the madrasa (school) of Janab Shu'ayb, and these two daughters were the teachers and instructors there. They were men. They were teachers. And these goats were their students. And Janab Shu'ayb, he himself was the prophet and teacher of that time. You can understand him as the one who managed everything. And what Janab Musa did, "sharab kiya" (made to drink), meant that these girls wanted to impart knowledge but were unable to, meaning they couldn't answer their students. Hadrat Musa, with the knowledge he had acquired, with that knowledge, he "made them drink water" (quenched their thirst for knowledge), meaning he gave them knowledge. He gave them knowledge and answered them. So they were very surprised and came and mentioned it to their father, "Today we met such a person who gave very good answers to our questions, and such and such things happened." So Janab Shu'ayb sent for him. He was a seeker of meeting Janab Shu'ayb. The meeting with Shu'ayb also happened. And Shu'ayb, what he did was he "married" them, which means he joined them together. Meaning, that student of yours, he told him, "Now you must support Janab Musa and be his Hujjat (proof) and stay with him, and you have to work with him. And to spread the da'wat." So this was the incident, and what did the world understand it to be? That Janab Musa's wedding was happening, to whose daughter? To the younger daughter. You see, what the matter was, what the Quran says, and what the incident actually is. All such stories are like this. All stories are of this kind. They are all matters to be understood. Otherwise, if incidents were like this, then, God forbid, God forbid, what would they be? They would be just tales. These are stories and tales. No, no, it was not like that. They were matters of wisdom. And Janab Musa, after that, stayed with Shu'ayb, and much education and training took place with Janab Shu'ayb. And after that, he started saying... from Musa... Musa took leave from Janab Shu'ayb, "Now you give me permission, so that I may travel." Otherwise, the reality is that Janab Musa did have a wife, you were married, and the woman you were married to, what was her name? Safura. This was an invalid wife of yours. This Safura was a very bad wife. And just as someone's son is bad, someone's wife is bad, someone's friend is bad, anyway, this wife was also very bad, your Safura. Anyway, whether she was bad or whatever she was, she was his wife. You took Safura and left. And your first child was expected. And you left and were going, Janab Musa. And the mountain of Tur was visible from a distance. And you were passing by the foot of the mountain of Tur. And Safura, at that time, started to feel the need for fire. "I need fire, because my condition is that of pregnancy, and it would be better if I could get some fire." *"Anastu naran"* (I perceive a fire). Janab Musa said, "I am seeing some fire on that mountain. And I feel its warmth. You wait here now, I will go to the mountain and bring fire." Hadrat Musa climbed the mountain. And seeing that fire, he climbed up. And going there, he got that fire. But there, as he went... ...and he saw that there was a strange scene. And what is it? The divinity of God became visible. A mountain and such a beautiful valley and all this. So he said, *"tarani"* (Show me Yourself). "O Lord of the Worlds, you show yourself to me." So Allah Ta'ala said, *"lan tarani"* (You will not see me). "You cannot see me, O Musa." See, that is why he is called Kalimullah (the one who spoke to Allah), because he had a conversation with Allah Ta'ala. There was a conversation. which the Quran Majid has taken. Now, you say, *"tarani"* (Show me Yourself), "O my Lord, show yourself to me." Allah Ta'ala says, *"lan tarani"* (You will not see me). "You cannot see me." Now this conversation was between Janab Musa and whom? It was of Uz. He was going towards Hadrat Imami. And he wanted to meet Janab Uz himself and gain benefit from him. So Janab Uz said, "O Musa, why have you come to me to gain benefit? Hey, between me and you, there are still many. So you should benefit from them. What are you trying to benefit from me for? You think that if I am found in the river, you will acquire from me? No, it doesn't happen like that." Sometimes a thought comes that if we meet someone very great, like Taiyib Sahab or so-and-so, we will get the entire treasure of knowledge. This is all wrong thinking. You, your vessel, for example, it's like this: you want to take water from your tap, but you don't want to take it from there. Instead, you yourself want to go where the water comes from, to the lake, and take from the lake. Alright, go to the lake. But even at the lake, what will you do? When you go to take it, what will happen? You will bend down and take it in your two hands. So it became known that it is that same hadd-e-'ali and the hadd-e-'ali of the hadd-e-'ali through which you got the water. You will not drink from the water like an animal with your mouth in it. So the matter, in fact, is that qudrat has kept these intermediaries. That without an intermediary, you are not going to get anything. So Hadrat Musa wanted all the knowledge to come to him from Maulana Uz himself. Now you will say, "Why not, just as other prophets like Janab Salih and others were given signs, why wasn't Janab Musa given them?" Qudrat did not want it. Now you may want it, but qudrat did not want it. Now this was the seeing of God and not seeing God. Now we are sitting with this, that God who is the Mubdi' Ta'ala (the Exalted Originator), and we are seeing this God and that God. Where is the matter going, where is it being applied, and where are the Muslims understanding it? So this call was from Janab Uz that, "O Musa, *"lan tarani"* (You will not see me). You cannot see me. *"Unzur ila al-jabal"* (Look at the mountain)." "Just look at the mountain. This bush that is visible on the mountain, just look towards it." Meaning what? That "meet with 'Adnan." That bush was 'Adnan. That was his name. And "meet with him. And acquire knowledge from him. You will find out the matter." Just seeing 'Adnan is enough. And when Janab 'Adnan... when he saw him, Hadrat Musa... And when he saw his knowledge, sitting there to acquire it... he was so astonished. *"fa-kharra maghshiyyan 'alayh"* (he fell down unconscious). That he fainted and fell, Janab Musa. Meaning, the apparent story is that Musa looked at that bush, and upon looking, he could not bear its light and splendor, and you fainted and fell. Apparent. In the inner meaning, what? That Janab 'Adnan... His knowledge was so lofty, and his intellectual depth was so great, that Janab Musa could not bear its splendor, and you fainted. Fainted means he could not keep his senses intact. "Oh, what kind of things are you saying? This is such a lofty and high-level matter." So, the Imam had told him correctly, "Hey, just acquire from 'Adnan. Coming to me is a distant matter. First, climb the steps." So this was the story of Janab Musa's *"lan tarani"*, that "you cannot see me." So *"lan tarani, lan tarani"* became [a phrase], that if someone starts arguing, they say, "He is doing a lot of *lan tarani*." He is doing *lan tarani*. So the matter, in fact, was this. And Janab Musa... People and... a poet has also written a couplet about it, "You go to get fire, and you find a prophet." Hadrat Musa went to get fire, and he got prophethood. But what was the reality? You are understanding and seeing. That Janab Uz is showing favor to him, being kind to him, and he has made him a student of Janab 'Adnan. And after becoming a student of 'Adnan, he, Janab Musa, got up. When he came out of that unconsciousness, meaning that amazement he was in, the चक्र (chakra/whirlpool) of knowledge he had entered... "This knowledge and this brilliance and this power and this matter..." When he came out of that amazement, Janab Musa... ...at that time, Janab Musa was commanded, "O Musa, now I am choosing you, making you a prophet." "I am making you a prophet, O Musa." This voice started coming from the mountain. Janab Uz is the one who is speaking, and he is addressing Musa, "O Musa, We have chosen you for risalat and nubuwwat." And Musa said, "What other burden have you put on me?" He said, "No, the talqin you have done, you should acquire it. And the discipleship you have undertaken, this is its fruit that you are receiving. Now you go. *"Idh-hab ila Fir'awna innahu tagha"* (Go to Pharaoh, for he has transgressed). O Musa, now go to Fir'aun. He has rebelled. He has rebelled in this land and established a rival mission (da'wat-e-zidd). He has established a mission against us, which is a rival mission. And it is necessary to deal with him." "Walid ibn Mus'ab." "And go to him." Janab Musa said, "O Allah, O Maulana Uz, I am ready to go, but give me a helper (mu'in) and supporter (madadgar). What will I do alone, O Allah? I am very worried, I am alone. What can a single person do? There should be someone for companionship." So he was asked, "Musa, what do you want after all?" He said, "My eyes are on my brother, O Master. Whose name is Harun." "My brother Harun." *"wa-shrah li sadri"* (and expand for me my breast). You pray, "O Lord, expand my breast, and make my brother Harun my supporter and my helper. *"Haruna wa si'an waziri"* (Harun, my... and minister). Make Harun my minister, make him my partner." And all this. This was the same prayer which the Prophet, 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam, made on an occasion for Amir al-Mu'minin. Anyway, here, when you are reading the story of Musa, then listen to that. That Janab Musa prayed this and said, *"wa-hlul 'uqdatan min lisani"* (and untie the knot from my tongue). "O Lord, do this favor also, make Harun my partner, my helper, my supporter, and there is a knot in my tongue. Meaning, some stutter has come into my tongue. Untie this stutter so that I can explain properly. And I can praise and glorify you, and I can explain the sciences. I have fallen into a great difficulty, O Lord. Please get me out of this." Janab Uz consoled Janab Musa, "Alright, go, we have made your Harun a Wasi (successor). And we have accepted him as your khalifa (caliph), as your Wasi. Now both of you go quickly. And Fir'aun has rebelled greatly in this land. Bring this matter to a conclusive end." Janab Musa was already majestic. What more can one ask? Now he got nubuwwat, he got risalat, and then he got a brother like Harun. After getting brother Harun, Janab Musa, who you had already seen, could dismiss someone with one slap. Now he went to slap whom? Fir'aun. Now he reached the court of Fir'aun. And Fir'aun's court is decorated. And he, after going there, said, "Fir'aun, you abandon rebellion and arrogance and accept faith, and all these things..." And he was proud. Fir'aun. Of his astrologers, of his magicians. And at that time the greatest magician was Samiri. The magic of Samiri was tremendous. And he was doing magic. He was proud of his Samiri. And he said, "Musa, what magic are you carrying on with? Which god are you talking about? I don't believe in any of this. And if you want to compete, then do it." What happened was that when Musa was about to leave, and with Janab Harun... and he was descending from Tur, at that time Allah Ta'ala said, "You... Musa, as you go, take two of our signs with you. You put your hand inside your pocket." "Inside your pocket" means put it inside your bosom, in your collar. As Janab Musa put his hand in, he said, "Now take it out." As soon as he took it out, it shone like the sun. He said, "Take this sign of ours with you. Secondly, you throw down this staff that you are holding in your hand, this big staff you are carrying, this stick, throw this stick." He threw it, and it became a snake. And Musa got scared. He was told, "Musa, there is no need to be scared. Pick it up in the name of Allah, and it will become a staff. We will return it to its original state, its first state. *"ala suratihi al-ula"* (to its former state). We will bring the snake to its first state. Don't worry." Janab Musa picked it up, and it became a stick again. He said, "Take these two signs and go. It will be enough for you." And there he reached, and he had to face Samiri. And over here, Fir'aun ordered, "Samiri, you and your magicians throw the ropes. Let Musa know how ropes become snakes." Samiri prepared all the magicians. Everyone threw their ropes, and they became snakes. And it was magic. There is no denying sorcery. That is why we believe in sorcery, that sorcery exists in the world. And I am telling you, one thing you must remember, is that all these things that happen, which our intellect does not understand... ...and the things that appear confounding to us, they are all just one thing. What is it? Surat-e-Khabith (The Evil Form). All the miracles are of the Surat-e-Khabith. What we call ghosts, spirits, jinn, and all these worldly things, it is all that one thing. Anyway, sorcery is also the name of that thing. And in different ways, in different forms, it manifests itself. So, those people threw the ropes, and the ropes became snakes. And what did Janab Musa do? He had already been commanded, and it had been told to him. He threw his stick. When he threw the stick, it became a huge dragon and swallowed the small snakes. It swallowed the small snakes. And this feat that was performed, Fir'aun was left watching, "This is a disaster. The snake of my magicians has been swallowed." This is the apparent story, and it also had an inner story. The meaning was that Samiri, who was the scholar on his side, threw many questions. And all those questions were answered by Janab Harun. On behalf of Musa, Harun gave the answers. With the answers, he was stunned, Fir'aun. And he started saying, "What is this? He is answering all these things. What do I... I am just watching." So, it happened in the apparent and also in the inner meaning. And this was the mission of misguidance, and Fir'aun at that time became very afraid. And started saying, "No, now this Musa must be killed." Just as it happened with every prophet. Someone, like Janab Ibrahim, they picked up and threw into the fire. So here too, you... ...an army was sent to capture him. And Janab Musa fled from there, and you went straight to the Nile, and you struck the Nile with your staff. And a path was made, and you went out. And what happened there? That the army entered, and the two... its waters met, and all were drowned. So the tyranny of Fir'aun was washed away. And over here, you escaped. This was the apparent matter, and the inner matter was that his mission was annihilated. And Janab Musa 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam continued to rely on his Janab Harun. And he made Janab Harun his Wasi. Now, what a marvel it was that when he got salvation from all these pharaohs, he reached his mission and wanted to run an institution of nubuwwat and risalat. So when he wanted to run it, a strange thing happened. That the people of the da'wat all became opposed. Whose? Of Hadrat Musa. They said, "Musa, we believe in everything of yours. We have seen your majesty since childhood. What is the extent of your majesty? A person dies from a single slap. What greater majesty can there be than this? We have seen your great miracles, your great things, your great knowledge and depth. We believe in everything, but our heart cannot understand this Harun business. The heart believes everything, but it does not accept Harun. We are not ready to accept your Wasi." So what happened? This is... this is called Surah al-Baqarah. This long chapter that there is, Surah al-Baqarah, which you read in the Quran Majid, this is that Surah al-Baqarah. That Hadrat Musa said that the Quran narrates it like this. "Look, Allah has commanded me, O people, that I should sacrifice a cow. And I want to... there is a cow in my sight, I want to sacrifice it." So everyone raised a hue and cry and said, "Musa, it cannot be like this. That you will slaughter whichever cow you want, it cannot be like that. We will tell you which cow you have to slaughter." So Musa said, "Alright, brother, you tell me. But I..." "So which cow will you bring? Bring the cow, and I will slaughter it." They said, "Musa, that's correct, we will bring the cow. But just tell us, which cow is in your sight? What are its signs?" It's this, that "we will be the ones to bring the cow." This is one thing. But along with this, look at the attitude of the people of the da'wat. That they are also asking, "Just tell us, what kind of cow did you want to slaughter?" Hadrat Musa said, "One that passes urine and stool in secret, in the darkness, and is very modest and shy. I would like to slaughter such a cow. And one that is black. And one that *"tasurru al-nazirin"* (pleases the onlookers), that pleases those who see it. Seeing it, they say, 'Wow, what a cow!'" So the Quran Majid narrates all these kinds of things. Now, Muslims are sitting with this, that this was the sacrifice of the cow, and your people were not agreeing, and Janab Musa told them its signs, and all the people brought a cow. And that cow, which Janab Musa in reality wanted to sacrifice, was that same cow. So the matter, in fact, was that "cow" is Hujjat. Hadrat Musa had twelve nuqab (chiefs), nuqaba. That is what Allah Ta'ala is saying, "O Musa, just see that this staff of yours, this stick you have, it is not an ordinary stick. Just strike with it." As soon as he struck, *"fa-nfajarat... ithnata 'ashrata... nahran"* (and there gushed forth... twelve... springs). From it, twelve springs began to flow, says the Quran. So what is the reality of this? That it was the miracle of Janab Musa, that your twelve nuqaba were ready. So out of the twelve nuqaba, out of the twelve du'at (missionaries), out of the twelve hujjats (proofs), you wanted to appoint one as your successor, as your wasi. And these people were saying that "we will choose." See, this election which happened with the Prophet, its beginning is here. And the foundation of democracy was laid here with Hadrat Musa. They said, "We will have an election. Meaning, we will choose. Meaning, we are also something, after all. We also have this much intellect. We have sense and understanding. Are we completely useless? No, we also have an opinion. We also have intellect." So they told Janab Musa. So this was the whole matter. And what happened was that as he told them the signs, that my hujjat should have such and such signs, whom I want to appoint as my successor and wasi. And they, taking those signs, when they pondered and made a choice, whom did they choose? They came bringing Harun. They came, and they brought that same Harun. And Janab Musa also wanted the same. *"Ma kunna nabghi"* (What we were seeking). Allah Ta'ala says, Janab Musa said, "Hey, this is what we wanted. This is what we wanted, and you also wanted the same. It's good that you are also happy, and we are also happy." Their word was also kept, and Janab Musa made Janab Harun his wasi. And after making him a wasi, now he started to live with Janab Harun. And Musa was very happy that my brother has been made my wasi, O Lord. What greater happiness can there be for me than this? That the one who explains everything, the one who does everything, the one who answers, is my brother, my Harun. That is why he answered Fir'aun and his people. And he was very proud of Janab Harun. Who? Hadrat Musa 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam. So in this pride and this state, you were going. And the situation was such... that now the final time is coming. And Janab Harun separated from you and he said, "O Janab Musa, give me permission, that I want to go for some recreation or some work." You would not separate Janab Harun. But when he asked for permission, you said, "Alright. When you want to go to a certain place, then go." This Janab Harun departed from there. Now, when he departed, there, when he was passing through that jungle, from that place where he wanted to go, he saw... that there are some people who are digging a grave. They are digging a grave. Seeing the grave being dug, Janab Harun stopped there and started saying, "Brother, for whom is this grave being dug? Who has died? And for whom is this grave being dug?" So... So Janab Harun said, "He must indeed be such a good person for whom such a good grave is visible to me. And if you people give permission, I would like to lie down and see." And Hadrat Harun, with their permission, entered that grave and lay down. As soon as he lay down, the Angel of Death descended and captured his soul. The apparent story is this, and after the soul was captured, they filled in the earth, and Harun passed away. In this way, Harun's death occurred. And... Now, apparently these are the matters, but what is the inner meaning? That is a matter of the rihiyat (spiritualities). Which I told you about, how the rihiyat are gathered. That is... that is still some intellectual matters which you will not understand now. But there were some things which were meant for Janab Harun to depart. And that time had come. So Janab... Their death is not death. Their life is not life. Their illness is not illness. Their murder is not murder. The Quran is giving evidence for this. So when you believe and understand this matter, then you should understand that this too was something similar. And Janab Harun's departure also happened in this way. And Janab Musa, now when he saw... when he got the news of Janab Harun's death, then you... his son, Janab Harun's son, whose name was Finhas, you chose him. "Now, to keep nubuwwat and risalat going, I choose Finhas, Harun's son." But Finhas was of a young age. So when they saw that Janab Musa... that Finhas is very young now, how should he be... an 'ataliq (tutor) was appointed. Just as Sayyidna Sulayman appointed Ja'far... Sayyidna Ja'far was appointed, but when he saw that he was very young... he had appointed him from birth. But when he saw he was young, he appointed Sayyidna Muhammad as his 'ataliq and mustawda' (trustee). In the same way, here too, a mustawda' was appointed. Whom? Yusha' bin Nun. Yusha' bin Nun, whose grave is in Baghdad. There, he... you appointed him, Janab Yusha' bin Nun, as his 'ataliq and mustawda'. And Yusha' bin Nun continued to handle the affairs, until Finhas grew up, and then he... nubuwwat and risalat. This chain, what I am calling the preliminary one, of the ghulams (servants), or the safirs (emissaries), or the viceroys, or the ones who handled the nubuwwat and risalat, this started running in its place. From where? From Janab Musa to Harun, and from Harun to Janab Yusha' bin Nun, and after him Janab Finhas. This chain went on here. And up above, the chain that went on from Janab Uz... that Uz, 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam, who are the Imam-e-Waqt, who are the Master of the time, the Lord of the time, the God of the time, they... their son 'Udhadh. Their son, his name was 'Udhadh. His name was Uz, and his son's name was 'Udhadh. He appointed him. 'Udhadh, after him, appointed his son. This chain of imamat went on like this, from son to father. Here the chain is not from father to son. This chain started to run here. So, anyway, the story of Hadrat Musa does not get completed. If some more things which are related to the story of Hadrat Musa... are said. Since I don't think that in the stories of Hadrat Musa, any other such thing remains. Except for one thing. And that thing is that in your time, great hukama' (sages/philosophers) were born. Yours was such an era in which Allah Ta'ala created great hakims (sages). The greatest hakim who came into the world... was Luqman Hakim. About whom Allah Ta'ala says that "We gave him wisdom." To Hadrat Luqman. So wisdom... The meaning of hikmat became Luqman, and the meaning of Luqman became hikmat. Such wisdom was given to Luqman. And Janab Luqman's stories... there are not many stories in the Quran Majid, but there is one piece of advice of yours which you gave to your children. "O child, after me, you should live like this." He gave advice, which is in the Quran Majid. Read it. It is very interesting and worth reading and understanding. In it, one of the pieces of advice is, *"wa la tamshi fi al-ardi maraha"* (and do not walk upon the earth with insolence). "O children, look, when you walk on the earth, walk very softly. Don't stamp your feet. Otherwise, the earth trembles and shakes. [unclear] You will be surprised, the earth... So, these are great words of wisdom that are related to Janab Luqman. In my reading, it has also come in a book, though it is not mentioned in the Quran Majid, that Janab Luqman, the advice he gave to his children... he gave some tablets, and he gave them some writings. Just as, understand it, he gave a book. And when he gave the book, the children saw it was a plain book, completely empty. They saw, all the pages were unwritten, completely plain. And they were worried, "What did father give us? There is nothing written in it. What advice is this? And what advice does father want to give?" But they saw that on one page, in a corner, only this much was written. "You keep your head cool and your feet warm." Only this much was written, "Keep your head cool, and keep your feet warm." Meaning, the head is the repository of all things. If you keep your head cool... meaning, emotions, feelings, all these things, if you do them with coolness, then no illness will come upon you. [unclear] Because disease is created from thought, from imagination, and from all these things, from mental things. So you gave this advice, "Keep your head cool." "Feet warm" means always be engaged in striving. Always be engaged in striving. So, anyway, these are great, excellent pieces of advice present in the Quran Majid. This was Hadrat Luqman, who was born in that era. Not only this, hey, Aristotle, whom they call Aristoteles, who are counted among the teachers of Alexander, Hadrat Aristotle... He was also from that same era. Not only he, but Hippocrates was there, Socrates was there, Plato was there, Galen was there, all these great, great sages were coming, of Greece, and they were from the same era as Janab Musa. Whose mention we have with great detail. With details. And these were those lofty personalities who... were not made subject to Musa. All these were lofty. All these sages who were there, Janab Hippocrates, Socrates, etc., they were greater than Musa. Why, brother, when they were greater, why wasn't he made Musa? Why wasn't he made a prophet? We think in this small way. No. "The beloved of the Beloved is the one whom He chooses." Understand it like that. The matter here is something else. They were certainly muwahhidin (monotheists) in their own place, great believers in tawhid. What can one say about them, Hippocrates and Socrates? They sounded the trumpets of reason. They wrote such books that the intellect is astonished. Even today, those things... Plato's Dialogues, read them. All these things are available. And who will stand against the sages of Greece? But for this reason, they were muwahhidin. And they did not come under the shari'ah of Musa. They were not made subject to Musa. And they were kept separate, and they were like that. And in the time of Janab Musa, among the incidents, there is the descent of manna and salwa. The misbehavior of the people of Bani Isra'il with you. All these incidents happened. And the descent of manna and salwa is a great matter. Manna and salwa are sciences. which were sent down to Janab Musa. Now if you look up manna and salwa in the Quran Majid, then its meaning is given as quail and partridge. Quail and partridge. It's good, very good. At least let the quail and partridge come. The meaning of it is given as quail and partridge. Quail and partridge. Even after reading it, one feels like laughing. That at that time, quails and partridges became very abundant. Meaning, to eat, there was plenty of quail and partridge to eat. So this is manna and salwa. Manna and salwa... They were great blessings from Allah Ta'ala. They were sciences, sciences that were sent down. And they understand this to be manna and salwa. So what will the literalist Muslim understand of these matters? So, anyway, they understood it in this way. So, anyway, my point was that the era of Hadrat Musa 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam continued for a thousand years. And in that period, such great, great sages continued to come. And not only all these sages came... ...but in your time, there was a king who passed away, whose name is Qarun. Qarun was a king who passed away, whose wealth was to such an extent... ...that the keys to his treasures were carried on forty camels. The one whose treasure keys were carried on forty camels, what would his treasure be like? So, anyway, Qarun also passed away. And... ...and Qarbun also passed away. So, anyway, this... Qarbun, he was a strange king. Who had great enmity with the people of wila' (devotion) and the people of truth. And at that time, Allah Ta'ala... ...wanted to save the Ashab al-Kahf (Companions of the Cave), and he saved the Ashab al-Kahf. And he told them, "Go into this cave." And when they went into the cave, Allah Ta'ala made sleep overtake them. From which, the Surah al-Kahf of the Ashab al-Kahf came down. You read Surah al-Kahf. So that... When they reached the cave, sleep overtook them there, and they slept. Now, *"rajman bi-l-ghayb"* (guessing at the unseen). Allah Ta'ala says that some say there were eight, some say that the ninth was their dog, some say there were seven, the eighth was their dog. *"Rajman bi-l-ghayb"*, meaning all this is guesswork. But Allah has its knowledge. So the reality is that if you see the exegeses of the Quran regarding the Ashab al-Kahf, they have taken countless names. Sometimes one name, sometimes another name. In some exegesis, other names are given, in some exegesis, other names are given. But correctly and in reality, the names they had... those Ashab al-Kahf, they are those Ashab al-Kahf whom... ...we have such blessed names of theirs, that if any calamity befalls, earthquakes come, storms come... ...then we, facing the qibla, if we take their names, then we can be saved from it and be safe. So our elders of the faith have also clarified their names, who they were and what they were. And a strange coincidence, a gentleman was going... I have also visited the Ashab al-Kahf two or three times. But he... when I was leaving, before that, there was a Bohra gentleman, but I had seen that person before, who was a great scholar. ...and he started asking me, "Brother, I have to go there too. Whose ziyarat (visit) is there?" So I said, "There is also the Ashab al-Kahf." He said, "I want to visit the Ashab al-Kahf." I asked, "Do you know the Ashab al-Kahf?" So I told him the names. And after going there, he saw that those same names were written on the graves. He was very surprised. He said, "Brother, this thing... I asked our mullah ji, but he didn't have it. How did you get these names?" So, anyway, those names are, Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim, Jamliqa, Kashutat, Kashafat, Yunus, Yawanis, Bus, 'Adhar, and their dog's name was Qitmir. So these are those Ashab al-Kahf. And who were there, upon whom sleep was made to descend, and whose story is mentioned in the Quran Majid. All this is within the era of Hadrat Musa, this thousand-year period that passed. All these things have come within that era and have happened. And after that, when the time of Hadrat 'Isa started to come, at that time also some people came. And how? That these... Zarathushtra of the Parsis, he has also come. He has come, about whom I will narrate, Insha'Allah, to you. And this era of Hadrat Musa lasted for a thousand years. And this chain of Janab Musa continued with your Harun, and after Janab Harun with Janab Finhas and Yusha' bin Nun. Over here, the imamat continued from Janab Uz. And until the chain reached where? It reached Maulana Khuzayma. Now, this is the time when 'Isa, 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam, was to descend. It was Hadrat Uz who had bestowed the Taurat upon Janab Musa. And the Taurat came down, meaning it is not that from above the heavens Allah Ta'ala is sending it down. It is not like that. The Taurat was an inspired book that was coming. And all these things came. And Janab Musa, taking that book, established the shari'ah. And he made his people follow that same shari'ah. [End of lecture]
