I have told you before about the planets, that the Lord of the worlds has set up our solar system in such a way that there is Zuhal (Saturn), Mushtari (Jupiter), Mirrikh (Mars), Shams (Sun), Zuhrah (Venus), 'Utarid (Mercury).

Some companions requested that their English names be given. And the buruj (zodiac signs), of which I had mentioned twelve, such as Jaddi, Dalo, Hut, Saur, Asad—I want to tell you their names in English. The name of Zuhal is Saturn. Mushtari is Jupiter. Zuhal is Saturn, Mushtari is Jupiter, Mirrikh is Mars, Shams is Sun, Zuhrah is Venus, and 'Utarid is Mercury, Qamar is Moon. And apart from these, Uranus and Neptune, etc., which were discovered in 1781, 1846, and 1930, do not fall within our solar system, although they are planets. However, they are not in our solar system, and they have only discovered three, but there are countless such planets. Our knowledge tells us that they are countless, but the thing is that our solar system is affected by them if we include them.

And secondly, the sections I had told you about, that there is Jaddi, Dalo, Hut, Hamal, Saur, Jawza', Sartan, Asad, Sunbulah, Mizan, 'Aqrab, and Qaws. Their names are as follows: Capricorn is Jaddi. Dalo is Aquarius. And Hut is Pisces. Hamal is Aries. Saur is Taurus. And Jawza' is Gemini. Sartan is Cancer. Asad is Leo. Sunbulah is Virgo. Mizan is Libra. 'Aqrab is Scorpio. And Qaws is Sagittarius. These are the names of the twelve sections that were formed there.

I had stated before you that every star, Allah Ta'ala had given it a reign of 1000 years, that is, had entrusted it with a plan. And in the beginning, the one who ruled was Zuhal. And after Zuhal, in its assistance and aid, Mushtari came. And in the third millennium, Mirrikh came. In the fourth, Shams came. In this way, all seven stars came one after another, and I had discussed up to six stars, up to 'Utarid.

In Zuhal, I had also mentioned the connection with ma'dan (minerals), nabat (vegetation), and haywan (animals), that the minerals and the vegetables that came into existence in the world, the minerals were formed only during the time of Zuhal. And the nabatat (vegetation) came during the time of Mushtari. And the haywanat (animals) began during the time of Mirrikh. In this way, their beginning continued to happen. And I had explained to you in detail at that time which minerals were formed at which time, what kind of vegetation grew, and what kind of animals were born and walked the earth. And the khama'ir (leavens/essences) of which kind of people were formed.

The most important thing was the khama'ir of people, that for instance, during the time of Zuhal, what kind of khama'ir were formed and for whom? And during the time of Mushtari, the khama'ir of 'afif (chaste) and dindar (pious) people were formed. And during the time of Mirrikh, since the reign was of Zuhal and Mirrikh was its assistant and aide, therefore it produced such people who are qatil (murderers) and who cause danga fasad (riots and discord) here. And those who cause a lot of trouble, the khama'ir of such people came during the time of Mirrikh. And during the time of Shams, it is clear that the khama'ir of kings, dictators, and those who rule in the world, their khama'ir were gathered in one place. And after Mushtari... after Shams, came Zuhrah, 'Utarid, and Qamar. In Zuhrah, I had told you that the khama'ir of the Arabs and of all women were formed.

During the time of 'Utarid, since he is the munshi-e falak (scribe of the heavens), during his time, all the accountants, hisabdah (account keepers), kuttab (scribes), the khama'ir of such people were gathered in one place. And in the end, Qamar came, who in the seventh millennium, provided murafadat (assistance), provided aid to Zuhal. Now it is clear that although Zuhal has a kharabi (malevolence) in its nature, Qamar, being sa'd (auspicious), since it is also one of the nayyarayn (two luminaries) and is a very good and pious star, for this reason, it did what? It reduced its nuhusat (malevolence). And in its time, the creation of man actually took place. Those khameere that were formed during the time of those six planets, those six planets' khameere that had been formed, they, after undergoing takhmeer (fermentation), their birth, in whose era did it happen? It happened in the era of Qamar. And in the 1000 years of Qamar, this thing happened, and after 1000 years, what happened? The takmil (completion)... after undergoing... their birth, in whose era did it happen? It happened in the era of Qamar. And in the 1000 years of Qamar, this thing happened, and after 1000 years, what happened? The takmil (completion) of this dawr (cycle) of Zuhal happened. The chhota dawr (small cycle) of Zuhal was of 7000 years, and the bada dawr (large cycle) of Zuhal is of 51,000 years. In this way, the sequence of every star has continued in the same way. And as I said, if we look at the present time, it is the dawr of Zuhal that is ending, and the dawr of Mushtari will begin. So this is what Allah Ta'ala says: `wa ashraqat al-ardu bi nuri rabbiha` (And the earth will shine with the light of its Lord), that the earth will be filled with the light of Allah. So when will it be filled? As soon as the dawr of Zuhal ends, the dawr of Mushtari will begin, the zuhur (appearance) of Janab-e Mahdi will happen, the arrival of Janab-e Qa'im will be imminent, all conditions will change, the sitr (veil) will end, kashf (unveiling) will come, the state of the jaza'ir (islands/realms) will change, the hadarat (presences) will spread. That is, such a great inqilab (revolution) will come in the era that it will have no limit. Although, it is not a total destruction. There will be no such destruction, and the earth will not be overturned in this way, in the way that we understand that in Qiyamah there will be such an overturning. It won't be like that. But despite that, you will see a tremendous taghayyur (change), and the conditions will change. Just as when the night passed, the matter was over. And when the day came, a bright day came, and its matters are entirely different. So it is the same situation, that now the day of din (religion) is here, and it is clear that the zuhur of the Imam is at hand, and he will not be in a state of khafa (concealment), in a makhfi (hidden) state.

Anyway, now when the moon, in the seventh millennium, began its murafadat of Zuhal, the first thing it did was to start moderating the fiza (atmosphere). The fiza started to become moderate, and a good atmosphere was prepared. Now look, what is on the earth? Flowers are also blooming, tuyur (birds) are also flying, streams of water are also flowing, it is also raining, winds are also blowing. There is great shadabi (lushness), gardens have blossomed, fruits are on the trees, haywan (animals) are also present, wuhush (wild beasts) are also in their places. All these things are present, of course, but in this makan (dwelling), the dwelling is there, but there is no makin (inhabitant) making a sound. Now the arrival of the makin is imminent, and Allah Ta'ala says about the makin: `wallahu anbatakum min al-ardi nabata` (And Allah has caused you to grow from the earth like a plant). The Holy Quran is saying that `wallahu anbatakum min al-ardi nabata`, Allah Ta'ala, O humans, has made you grow from the earth like a plant.

So it becomes clear that despite the Holy Quran saying it so clearly, today no hakim (philosopher/doctor) or any firqa (sect) or any 'alim (scholar) from the scholars of Islam says that man was created in this way. But rather, they say something like this, that either they accept what science says, or they say that Allah Ta'ala's taqdir (decree), as it wants, in that way the creation happened. But we want to know in what way it happened. In the world of Islam, the greatest scholars who consider themselves worthy of being called so, Parvez Sahab, who wrote Ma'arif-ul-Quran, and he is from the Ahl-e Quran, and he thinks that no one has written better than him. He wrote many books, his Urdu is excellent, and he has a great command of philosophy, he knows mantiq (logic), there is no doubt about this. But after writing all this, he established topics that, in the context of the creation of Hazrat Adam, he wrote a whole book. And the first topic he gave was this very thing: that the creation of man, the birth of Janab-e Adam, and after that he established the topic, Janab-e Adam's growing up and being appointed to risalat (prophethood) and nabuwwat (prophethood), and after that the events, then Shaytan and all these things he established. So you see, the topic is very alluring and very interesting, and the first is that the birth of Janab-e Adam. Now if you read the whole thing, you will see that except for the fact that it is poetry, and it is stated in it that fragrant winds are blowing, the greenery is waving, and the fiza is moderate, and such conditions have arisen, and it is so, the universe is decorated, and the state of the sun is this, and when the moon is in the night, its nuraniyat (luminosity) is this. This kind of lafazi (verbiage) upon lafazi, page after page, they have blackened. So, writing poetry, how long does it take? So in this way, he has written all this, page after page has been written, but everything is there except the birth of Janab-e Adam himself. Now you can see, the book is available.

So, it is clear that since these things did not reach them, they did not prostrate at the door of the wealth of Amir al-Mu'minin, so it is clear that how would they attain these 'ulum (sciences)? They did not attain any knowledge at all. And Allah Ta'ala had clearly stated here in the Holy Quran, if there was some 'aql (intellect) and if they had understood it by taking this, there was a lot in it. That why did Allah Ta'ala say so? That `wallahu anbatakum min al-ardi nabata`, Allah Ta'ala has made you grow like a plant. The Holy Quran is stating this clearly and explicitly. Despite this, they say strange things.

Now, what was the state of science? Science kept doing somersaults. And its state was that sometimes its nazariya (theory) was something, and sometimes its nazariya was something else, it kept happening. And it... sometimes it followed Darwin's theory, sometimes it believed in the theory of evolution, that there was a jarsuma (germ), cells were formed, from cells the matter progressed, and happening, happening, happening, in this way the universe kept progressing, progressing. And today I read a revolutionary thing in the newspaper which I will tell you. It is an astonishing thing that their old theory is also faltering a bit, and they have presented a new theory. It was published in the Arab Times, and I want you to hear it, and it is possible that you have read it too. And a 66-year-old professor and scientist has proven that theory wrong too and said that man has not come from mud, etc., and we... how he came, as they have stated, you will hear.

My point is that science, whatever theory it has adopted, and their nazariyat (theories) which are of science, they have kept changing. And most of all, the mushahadah (observation) that we have had of this changing of theories, that is in the context of the lunar and solar eclipses. In the context of the lunar and solar eclipses, their theories have changed in many ways. And their theory was also this at one time, that the ebb and flow, the madd-o-jazar (tide) that happens in the sea, from this the lunar and solar eclipses are produced. And after that, they said no, but rather they... who are rotating and moving, in that, in the moving, if it comes in between, then the lunar and solar eclipses are produced, as you all know. So anyway, these are their theories, and it is clear that despite this, they proceed with great ehtiyat (caution) and with great mushahadah, and from that, we have no denial at all.

So, my point is that with this theory, they have tried to prove that Darwin is completely wrong in his place, and it is not so. But the reality is that Darwin's theory is also correct, in its own way. We say that Darwin's theory is also correct, but the only difference that has occurred is... now since those explanations have not come, it will be a bit difficult for you to understand. But what I have to say is that if there is a ladder, one who sees it can think that the ladder has been placed for those who are descending, and I will see that it has been placed for those who are climbing. So it's just a matter of perspective, because of which Darwin's theory became what it is. Otherwise, in its place, it is a theory for sure, and he has presented a complete thing and has presented it correctly. But what he said, that our ancestors were those, that is wrong. It is not like that. But rather, this is an 'adhabi shakl (form of punishment), and how punishment comes and how they are sent into the darakat (lower ranks), you will, Insha'Allah, hear it in detail when that occasion comes. I only have to say this much, that now you... this... the... which is our nazariya, and not just a nazariya, but the haqiqat (reality), since we do not speak from a nazariya, but we speak from haqiqat. So our Imams and our Ahl al-Bayt, and Amir al-Mu'minin who is the sarchashma (source) of this, what they have stated is this very thing, that how man was created, and the other things like nabat (vegetation) and haywan (animals) and all the namiyati (organic) things, how they came into the world, he... as it was presented, I have presented it before you, and that thing will surely be in your background.

So now, see that when this entire world, haywan have also come, and madaniyat (minerals) have also been formed, and nabatat are also present, and everything is there, but Hazrat Insan (Mankind), his arrival is imminent here, and his wujud (existence) has not yet come. The sabab (cause) for bringing wujud into being was who? It was the moon. And Allah Ta'ala had placed the moon seventh so that in its time, the creation of man could happen. And that creation of man whose khameere had been formed from all six planets. They were formed in the time of Zuhal, they were formed in the time of Mushtari, they were formed in the time of Mirrikh, they were formed in the time of Shams, they were formed in the time of Zuhrah and 'Utarid. In the time of all of them, the khameere were formed. I had said that they have been leavened, and they have been collected, their divisions are separate, and people of different natures have been separated. That is, dindar (pious) people were separated, so that was done in the time of Mushtari. Kings and those who were to come as leaders and dictators, they were formed in the time of Shams. Anyway, all that which had happened, now how did their creation happen? The first thing the moon did was to moderate the fiza. It moderated the fiza, and in the universe, there were neither such heavy rains, nor so much cold, nor so much heat. A moderate condition was created by it. First, it cleaned the fiza. This thing happened. The second thing that happened was that the 6000 years that had passed before it, in the time of Zuhal, Mushtari, Mirrikh, Shams, Zuhrah, 'Utarid, the madaniyat that were inside the earth, in the core, and no human hand had touched those madaniyat. It is clear that human existence was not there, so who would touch it? Or would animals touch them? That question does not arise. So then, these madaniyat that were there, these madaniyat were finished in their place. How were they finished? So what was the matter? That in this universe, there were many earthquakes. And some conditions were such that there was an upheaval. `a'liyaha safilaha` (its high ones became its low ones), as Allah Ta'ala says that We made the high ones low and the low ones high. So in this way, the ups and downs that were created, and those madaniyat were ground and crushed in their place and were finished. In the same way, the nabatat that had grown, whether they were in the form of fruits, or whether they were general jharpat (vegetation) or of any kind, that which had grown in the universe, perished in 6000 years, was finished, and vapors rose from them. Vapors rose from madaniyat, these vapors rose from all the nabatat, and the haywanat, whatever they were, whether they were siba' (predators), darinde (beasts), or whether they were muhallal haywan (permissible animals), every animal that was dying, vapors rose from them. But nature was distinguishing them, and it was the taqdir (decree) of Allah Ta'ala that He distinguished between the halal and haram. And it is clear that the halal was being taken to a specific place, and the vapors of the haram were generally rising. Anyway, nature, from all these haywan, nabat, or ma'dan, from their being crushed and finished, the vapors that arose, all of them together became a cloud and cast a shadow, and these rains started to fall. Rains started to fall in this universe, and these rains were special, and nature was giving it a मौका (opportunity), at a specific waqt (time), nature... though rains would have fallen before this as well, many times, but these rains were very special, and nature was making some arrangement, for the arrival of man. So now these rains that fell, these rains, our du'at say that this was happening in the entire world. At that time, there were no houses, no thing. You should imagine such a world, when there are no houses, no city, no thing, no big... there are none. In such a state, the things that happened in 6000 years, from their vapors, the rains are falling. Imagine this. When the rains fell, these rains fell in a slanting state, and those rains, after coming to the earth, since it was raining continuously, the force of these rains created pits in the earth. Just as pits are formed even today, in the same way, this rain created pits in the earth, and along with creating pits, some water also collected in those pits. I hope you are understanding. These vapors rising from the ma'dan, nabat, and haywan of 6000 years, they became a cloud and cast a shadow, and rains started to fall, and what did these rains do? They created pits. Rains also fell, and pits were also created, in the entire world. There was no part of the universe that was left out, it wasn't like that. In the entire world, these pits were formed. And the pits were of what kind? They were of the kind that, just as children usually make gharonde (sandcastles) in the sand, they make gharonde with their feet and pull them out, pits of that kind were formed, because the rains were falling in such a way. And in the entire world, pits of this kind were formed. And I also told you that along with the pits being formed, some water also collected in it. When this condition had occurred, then Allah Ta'ala's power wanted that the second rains that fall, after those rains fell, that there be very heavy rains, from this... the first rains that fell, which created pits and water collected in it, stronger rains than this should fall. So, after this, rains fell again, and those rains were more qawi (powerful), zordar (stronger), and musladhar (torrential), those rains started to fall. Now, these rains that were falling, which fell upon the first rain, these rains were stronger, and what happened was that this water and that water, both mixed with each other. And in the pits, they mixed with each other. The first water that came into the pits, nature had made such an arrangement for it that it was a matter of unas (females), it was in the state of the water of women. And the second water that came, it was in the state of the water of men, that is why it was considered qawi (powerful), and that is why it is `ar-rijalu qawwamuna 'ala an-nisa'` (men are the protectors and maintainers of women). So this was a powerful water. So this water and that water mixed, and they merged with each other, and along with that, the heat of the pit, that heat started to cook this water in such a way as things are cooked in a degchi (pot) for us. Just as things are cooked in a degchi, in the same way, the heat of the earth started to cook this water, and this water, after being cooked, started to boil and bubble up, and the vapors started to form and fall, so what happened from that? It started to become less, a khulasa (essence) started to form, it started to condense. And along with that, a quality started to form in it, that by this repeated boiling and falling of vapor, a dohiyat (oiliness) was created in it, a tel-pan (oiliness) was created. This water became oily, and this water, after being cooked to a certain extent, this water settled, and that water which settled, on it, the tadbir (planning) of the moon had started from there, but the moon, with a look of istehsan (approval) or with a look of iltija (entreaty), looked towards whom? Towards Zuhal, that now you plan and help me in this matter. The matter was that Allah Ta'ala wanted that when man is created, all seven stars, all seven planets, should also have a hand in it. So it is clear that Zuhal helped it, because the badshahat (kingship) was its, and anyway, nature wanted it to help. So, if Zuhal had not helped, that water, from the pit, it had become so oily, and it had become so much like pare (mercury), that it would have probably come out and gone out of the pit. So to keep it in the pit, whose tadbir worked? The tadbir of Zuhal worked, and it kept that water in the pit. This is what Allah Ta'ala says: `sulalatan min tin` (an extract from clay), and `wa ja'alnahu sulalatan... nutfatan fi qararin makin, fa-ja'alna an-nutfata mudghatan, fa-ja'alna al-mudghata... 'alaqatan, fa-ja'alna al-'alaqata... 'izaman, fa-kasawna al-'izama lahman, thumma ansha'nahu khalqan akhar` (And We made him an extract... a drop of fluid in a safe lodging, then We made the drop a clinging clot, then We made the clot a lump of flesh... and We made the lump bones, then We clothed the bones with flesh, then We developed him into another creation). So Allah Ta'ala has enumerated all the stages of the janin (fetus) in this verse. It is that first, an 'itr (essence) was extracted from tin (clay), and the name of this 'itr is sulalah, which was placed in the backbone of the father and in his spinal cord. This water, Allah Ta'ala calls it sulalah, and sulalah means that which is extracted. And after that, when it finds a qarar (resting place), with the mother, then it is called nutfah (sperm-drop). And after nutfah, it becomes 'alaqah (leech-like clot). After 'alaqah, it becomes mudghah (lump of flesh). After mudghah, its state becomes that of 'izam (bones), and then Allah Ta'ala says: `fa-kasawna al-'izama lahman` (then We clothed the bones with flesh). We clothed those bones with flesh. `thumma ansha'nahu khalqan akhar` (then We developed him into another creation). We made the final creation after this, that is, We blew the ruh (soul) into it. So this is the sequence the verse is showing. With exactly this sequence, the child of the earth and sky was passing through, and who was being born from the pit. And it is that this water of the pit, there, which had settled, I told you that it was the tadbir of Zuhal due to which it could settle. And who is this? You are seeing that one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, the seventh is the moon, and Zuhal becomes which one? The eighth. That is why with us, if a child is born in the eighth month, it does not live. What is the matter? It is that the tadbir of Zuhal happened here first, so it could settle. Otherwise, if the tadbir of Zuhal had been given after the seventh, that is, after working on this child, after the seventh, if Zuhal had also been given a tadbir in the eighth, then what would have happened? This child would have suffocated and died. So nature, from whom it has to take work, it takes work from it, and this was doing the work of making it settle. So Zuhal did this work. Mushtari on its... the a'za'-e ra'isah (vital organs), and which are the cause of the greatest... for it, it paid attention to those things, and it paid attention to the heart and the brain. Whose? Of Mushtari. Mirrikh paid attention to the asfal hisson (lower parts). And Shams completely prepared the heart, and in the body of man, it was its tadbir, the tadbir of Shams. Because it is also the heart, and the sun has become the heart of this entire solar system, that is why it paid attention to the heart of the human child, and it shaped the heart. Now Zuhrah came. Zuhrah did this, that it made the tamiz (distinction) that this one who is being born is a male or a female. This tamiz of the shakl (form), whether the eye is small or big, or all the other a'za, how they should be, making its features was whose job? It was the job of 'Utarid. 'Utarid did this job, and when that child was completely formed, now it was the job of Qamar... now since Qamar had done the first job, you know that, that it did all this work, but now the separate tadbir of the stars began, and the tashkil (formation) started, and in that water, all the a'za and jawarih (limbs and organs) started to form. And in it, our... the a'za'-e ra'isah were also formed, our small a'za were also formed, and all things were prepared, and the man... whether he is a male or a female, this tamiz also came. When all this thing happened, now the moon was entrusted with the task again, that you do the final work, `wa ansha'nahu khalqan akhar`, that the work of blowing the ruh into it, that was of the moon itself. I had told you in the beginning, you would remember that I had said that when man fell from there, a shabih (likeness) came from there, so in the coming of that shabih and in accepting its nadamat (repentance), a part of its entire jism (body)... we had done a graft... a part of it had accepted nadamat, a part had accepted its... nadamat after the fact. In this way, a tartib (sequence) was established. And I had told you that the first to accept nadamat was the natiqah (rational soul), and after that was the hissiyah (sensory soul), and after that was the namiyah (vegetative soul). And in our jismani (physical) terms, it was the heart, and after that, it was the brain, and then its quwwaten (faculties) and all those things happened, the a'za'-e ra'isah happened, and then the asfal hisse, and our hair and nails and the soles of our feet, all came. So, a kaifiyat (condition) of this sort exists. So now, when you are understanding this, now the moon, in the very end, the blowing of the ruh into it was related to the moon, because the markaz (center) of the namiyah is the moon. You understand? The markaz of the namiyah is the moon, so for this reason, the moon paid attention to it, and it bestowed that namiyah which it had with it. Which is its own thing. It's not someone else's thing. The namiyah that was in the moon, it was its own. Whoever is being born, it was of that, and it bestowed that namiyah. From bestowing it, what happened? It grew. It grew and was formed. When that child was completely ready, and harakat (movement) had started in it, and the heart started to beat, the a'za'-e ra'isah, and the chamra (skin) was stretched over it, and he was a completely fine human child. And when he became one year old. So, until he became one year old, what did he go through in the pit? His hal (situation) is this: that he was in the pit, and just as our child gets ghiza (nourishment) from his parents, nature was providing him ghiza from the jawf (depths) of the earth. And how? From that water which was left in the pit. That water which was left in the pit, from that same water, he was getting it through the naf (navel), just as our child gets it, in the same way, he was getting it through the naf. And the second zariya (source) was the angutha (thumb). He was sucking the angutha, and in sucking, nature was providing him... through the angutha also. Today our child also sucks his angutha, and he sucks it in the same watirah (habit), because this thing is included in his fitrat (nature). It is not so that he does it just like that. No, rather it is in his fitrat, the fitrat-e ilahi (divine nature) works. And since this thing is in the fitrat... so he sucks the angutha. But that child, who was the child of the earth and sky, when he was sucking, nature was providing him with ghiza. It's not that milk was flowing or anything, it's not like that, but rather he was getting ghiza, and he was obtaining ghiza. From his own self. This was the intizam (arrangement) of nature. When this kaifiyat was going on, then, just as our children, after birth, are given tamarrukh (massage), that is, oil is applied, and to provide that child with good ghiza, now you can't feed him anything from the mouth except milk, but they make him strong and his a'za tandurust (healthy) by massaging him with oil, etc. In exactly the same way, this child of the earth and sky was rolling in that same water, and nature, from that water, which had become oily, was massaging him with it, and nature was... massaging him. All these things were happening, and one year passed. For one year, he was taking ghiza in this way, as I have told you, and after one year, he, with ease, came out of that pit. When he came out of the pit, now the condition of that child was this... since this was the child of the earth and sky, it has been said that this newborn child was equal to our four-year-old child. Our four-year-old child's equal was his... this... and he came out, and after coming out, some water was left in the pit. Some water was left in that pit, and this... he came out of the pit. Nature willed that all of these newborns, who were born from all the pits, should all be dhukur (males), men. From all the pits, as many as were born, innumerable from the pits, in the entire world, who were those newborns? They were men. All of them were men. And the bachawa pani (leftover water) that was in that pit, on that leftover water, nature willed that pani should fall on it again. So, barishen (rains) started to fall again, and that barish ka pani (rainwater) came and fell into that pit again. And again this pani, the leftover pani and this pani, mixed with each other, and after mixing, in it too, a kaifiyat of the same kind started to happen, as had happened before. And the same process was repeated, as I have stated, that whole process, after happening, now this tashkil took place, in the same way, the a'za'-e ra'isah were formed, the sun... on it... the heart and brain worked, Zuhrah formed the distinction of male and female, and 'Utarid made its features, etc. Anyway, after all this was formed, now that which was being formed, they were all women. All of them who were being formed in the pits were women. And this man who was born, and the woman who was born from the same pit, they were brother and sister. So, the ma'mla (matter) of brother and sister, here... we... our nasl (lineage) that continues, in this too it happens that she who is the bahan (sister), it's not just a ma'mla of perspective, but there are some ma'mlat of this kind as well. There are some ma'mlat of this kind, as I have stated. Anyway, these newborns, both of them were brother and sister. This is what the Prophet, may peace be upon him, stated in his time, that the children of Janab-e Adam were being born in this way, and then they were married to each other, and after their marriage, their nasl continued, and people spread in the world. But the 'awam (common people) and the 'ulama-e Islam (scholars of Islam), how do they state it? I will tell you. The 'awam state that since Hazrat Adam was such a great nabi (prophet), so in their time... Adam, such a great, great nabi, although the lowest of nabis is Janab-e Adam. Among the nutuqa' (speakers), the lowest is Janab-e Adam. Above him, the ulu'l-'azm (of high resolve) nabi is Janab-e Nuh. Above them, the ulu'l-'azm is Janab-e Ibrahim, and after Ibrahim are Musa and 'Isa and our Prophet, may peace be upon him. But they consider Janab-e Adam so great that if it were possible for them... now, since he is buried next to Janab-e Amir al-Mu'minin in Najaf al-Ashraf... Hazrat Adam and Janab-e Nuh and Janab-e... Janab-e 'Ali, these three are buried in the same place. There is one qabr (grave) for these three. Hazrat 'Ali, Janab-e Nuh, Janab-e Adam, in one place. Otherwise, if they had their way, they would have made a qabr of one or two miles for him. So, they couldn't fulfill their hasrat (desire) on him, so where did they fulfill their hasrat? On Amma Hawwa'. The qabr of Amma Hawwa' that they made in Jeddah, its condition is such that if you visit the feet, then you have to travel by car and after traveling, you go and visit the head. So the ziyarat (visit) is of a furlong or two. I have also had the sharaf (honor) of ziyarat, and I visited in the same way. One has to visit while sitting in a car. So now what can be done? The feet are in one place, and the head is in another, and that too so far away. Now, of course, the amma (mother) of the entire universe. So Amma Hawwa', after all, how big would she be? So, anyway. Now, of Amma Hawwa'... I was saying that the 'ammatul-muslimin (general body of Muslims) and the 'ulama-e Islam, they especially write this, that they are asked, "How was the world created, and how were humans born and how did they spread?" "Oh, it's very easy. Hazrat Adam and Janab-e Hawwa', they... one jhol (birth), that is, one haml (pregnancy), that haml was so large that... the situation was that one लड़का (boy) and one लड़की (girl). In every jhol, nature had specified this. Although for the children of Adam, this is not specified. But since Janab-e Adam was the first, so for him it was specified that in their jhol, the haml, there should be one male and one female. A brother and sister. And after that, what? So the second jhol that would happen, the brother and sister of that jhol, this boy with that girl, that girl with this boy, they married them off, and in this way, the nasl started to grow. We ask, "Why didn't Janab-e Adam marry that boy with that girl?" They say, "Is there a rishta (relationship) between brother and sister?" Oh, good man, if you don't count the brother-sister rishta this way, then you are counting it that after one jhol, the second jhol is also their children. This is the Muslim, and this is their 'ilm (knowledge). So they marry one jhol with the second jhol, although this was not the case at all. There was no zikr (mention) of Adam, no zikr of Amma Hawwa', no zikr of their children. The baat (matter) was of the child of the earth and sky, of the लड़का and लड़की born from this earth. That they, who were being born from one pit, were brother and sister. They were brother and sister, and the sahib-e waqt (master of the time) who was the Qaym-rut-e A'zam at that time, whose details you will know now, they promoted this and they explained. What science now generally calls the Stone Age, and after that, civilization slowly started to begin. Anyway, it was a matter of the very beginning. They explained how humans should interact with each other. So they explained that look, a brother and sister born from one pit, they are brother and sister. They should be married to the one born from another pit, this boy with that girl, that girl with this boy. They performed the nikah, and the marriage happened, and in this way, later the nasl continued. Anyway, what I am stating is that it remained in this way, and in the entire universe, the pits that were formed, first the women... the men were formed, and the bachawa pani (leftover water) from that, on which the barishen fell, from that the women were formed. And after the birth of the women, these two, 'awrat (woman) and mard (man), both were brother and sister, and they were married to each other. But when they came out of the pit, whether it was a boy or a girl, when they came out of the pit, they needed ghiza (food), just as our child starts to cry and needs ghiza, and dudh (milk) has to be given, things have to be done. In exactly the same way, he also needed ghiza. But who was there to feed him now? This is why he is so qawi (strong), that he is equal to a four-year-old child. He was running, and he started to run, and nature has grown many fruits and flowers, and everything is present in the universe. Mewe (fruits) are present. And such mewe that do not need to be peeled. That is, it's not like oranges or such things that you have to peel. It's not like that, but rather there are mulberries, there are grapes, and such things that can be eaten without peeling. So such things are growing, and he was plucking and eating them. Such mewe that are without peels, he was plucking and eating them, and from this, he was getting ghiza, and the child of the universe was keeping himself alive in this way. But now what happened? Along with this, as time started to pass, their age started to increase. The matter of shadi-byah (marriage) happened later, of course, but along with that, they started to have this samajh-bujh (understanding) that we should make arrangements for our sardi (cold) and garmi (heat). We should protect ourselves from the sardi and in the garmi, we should go out, we should do that. So, just as the khayal (idea) of making a ghar (house) came to them, and the ibtida (beginning) was such that they didn't even know how to make a ghar, so they made gharon (caves) their ghar. They started living in caves. And just as you see that the Stone Age, which is mentioned in the beginning, the halat (conditions) of that zamana (era) which you have read about, exactly the same waqi'at (events) happened, and they, in the same way, started living in pits... in caves. And to get their ghiza, they would kill animals by hitting them with stones, and from that stone, they would also make some hathiyar (weapons), and with that, they would slaughter them and eat. And along with that, slowly, tahzib (civilization) started to spread among them. But the sabab (cause) of the spread of tahzib was due to our Imam, may peace be upon him, that along with the zuhur (appearance) of this universe, the Khaliq (Creator) of the universe had also come into the world. The Khaliq of the universe had also created the malik (master) of that universe, and he is our first Imam, whom we call Qaym-rut-e A'zam. Whom if you look at in the encyclopedia, Qaym-rut means the first badshah (king) who appeared in the world. So they were the first to spread tahzib in the world, about how we should live, how we should protect ourselves, what we should do. Now, where did this happen and what happened? Its ahwal (account) is such that I had told you in the beginning that when in the universe, these vapors that had risen, and from which the barishen had fallen, among those barishen, there were some such barishen also, which Allah Ta'ala had preserved. And I had told you that they were the vapors of the muhallal haywanat (permissible animals). Either they were coming from gold and silver, or they were... from better grass and leaves and mewe, from their perishing, the vapors were rising, or from the death of halal animals themselves, the vapors were rising. Nature was collecting that and bringing it to such a maqam (place) where nature wanted it to rain. So, that maqam was of Lanka. It was of Ceylon, it was of Lanka. There nature took these vapors. And there, at that place, which nature had specified, it rained there, just as barishen had fallen in other places, but the barishen here were special. You will say, "How can there be such special barishen?" So today, whether you believe it or not, that there is also a thing called the abr-e naisan (April cloud). That which you have been believing about the abr-e naisan, that when the abr-e naisan rains over the seas, then moti (pearls) are formed in sip (oysters). So how did this abr-e naisan come into existence? So just as this is, so in the same way, you should understand that when nature intends, it does everything. So the bandobast (arrangement) was made, and Lanka at that time was the best place where nature took it, and after taking it there, the barishen fell. And that too at this maqam, which perhaps... we don't know, and... there is no correct estimation of it, what to locate. But Adam's Peak, which is called, that... even today it is famous by the name of Adam's Peak in Ceylon. That perhaps was the same maqam where nature took that abr (cloud). And this abr rained there, and after raining, there too pits were formed, and from the pits, in the same way, the man and woman were born. But, this nature which was creating them, it is clear that in 6000 years, they were so khasusiyat (special) that they were the very khulasa (essence), that is, they were filtered, very good, clean and shaffaf (pure). From their barishen, these are happening. So what does nature intend? It is that nature is bringing ujale (light) from andheron (darkness). It is bringing light from darkness. And what to say of its tathir (purification), what to say of its filtering? They are being filtered in a big sieve. So, that nature, as it intended, they are coming with great ehtiyat (caution) and great ehtemam (care). And they were brought there, and the pits that were formed were 28. They were not 29, and they were not 26. But there were 28 pits. And those 28 pits were such that the 28th pit was at a 'ala maqam (high place), which nature had specified for it, that this is the highest and most muqaddas (sacred) maqam. Here too, just as no name is given to a thing, but when it becomes muqaddas, then you kiss it as muqaddas and you visit it, you... so in the same way, that would be a muqaddas maqam, where that 28th pit would be, and 27 pits would be around it. It seems as if this is a jama'at (congregation) of muqtadis (followers), and he is their pesh-imam (leader of prayer). So in exactly the same way, that the kaifiyat (condition) of these 28 is such, our du'at say, that if you consider all of them to be in the state of a yaqut (ruby), of a ruby, in the state of a yaqut, then consider the entire world to be a patthar (stone). If the entire world is in the state of a patthar, then in terms of their tanasub (proportion) they are saying. The patthar is not the meaning. To show the tanasub, in terms of fazilat (virtue), that if you consider them to be a patthar, then this is in the state of a yaqut. And if you consider the 27 to be a patthar, then that 28th one is in the state of a yaqut. You understand? This is the qawl (saying) of the du'at, and they have said that he was the most ashraf (noble), the most bartar (superior), and the greatest. The baat (matter) was that I should tell you the pichhla sabaq (previous lesson), that kallamam. The kallamam who were... those kallamam, in kallamam I had told you that there, some were of a nisbat-e a'la (high relation) and some were of a nisbat-e adna (low relation). Some were unche (high) and some were niche (low). Nisbat-e a'la and nisbat-e adna, `ma 'anhu wujudihi ila dhatihi`, two relations are there, which reason has left. Due to those two relations, two relations were established. So I had told that two relations, just as they were established there, so in their tawatur (succession), I had told you that the zaat (being) of Qa'im al-Qiyamah, the zaat of Amir al-Mu'minin, and after that, the zawat (beings) of all the Imams, and among the anbiya' (prophets), as many anbiya' as came, 124,000, they were in the nisbat-e adna. The Imams were in the nisbat-e a'la. This I had told you in mukhtasar (brief). But now I want to add a little to it. The baat was that at that time if I had said it, you would not have understood it. But now I add that before Janab-e Qa'im, there were also some nuqte (points). There were some nuqat-e nur (points of light) which were in the Bayt al-Ma'mur, and they were written with the qalam-e nur (pen of light). And who were those nuqat? Who were the people of that order? Who were the kallamam? Whose... whose nadamat (repentance) was even greater than these. And they were the sahiban-e anwar (masters of the lights), aqwar (cores), and adwar (cycles). Now you will also find this a bit mushkil (difficult) to understand, but anyway, now I have explained to you the dawr, qawr, and mawr. So you should understand that he who covers the dawr, who covers the mawr, and who covers the qawr, he is the sahiban-e anwar, aqwar, and adwar. But those who were coming here, at the beginning of the qawr, of every qawr... that is, a dawr of 400,000 years, and such 400,000 dawrs make one qawr. So at the beginning of every qawr, the paida'ish (creation) happens here. In the universe. Everything is destroyed, and after that, the paida'ish happens. Now what is yours? What is our position? That 399 qawrs have passed. Of the 400th qawr, in the first dawr, we are at the end of the dawr-e sitr (cycle of the veil). This is our position at this time. So 399 qawrs have passed, and we are proceeding in the 400th dawr, and its... in the first dawr, our... is ending at this time. So it becomes clear that the 400th qawr, our... when did it begin? 400,000 years ago. And that... 400,000 dawr, in its qawr... and it... where did it begin? That is, the ras-e qawr (head of the core) which began, it began in Ceylon, it began in Lanka. I am telling you its hal (situation). You would be understanding. So after this destruction, this construction that happened, so I am telling you about this construction, not the first construction of the universe. The first construction of the universe that happened, I will tell you that when the mauqa' (occasion) comes. But for now, you should understand that we have to look at our own ghar (house). So I am telling you how your ghar was built. That our duniya (world), that which is the 400th qawr, we are ending its first dawr. But this 400th qawr which began, it began in Lanka, and it happened in this way, that 28 afrad (individuals) were born there. And these 28 afrad were all such that they were so unche (high), in terms of their maratib (ranks), and in Imamat, they were all of the nisbat-e a'la (high relation). All 28 of them were of the nisbat-e a'la, not in the nisbat-e adna. Not a single one was in the nisbat-e adna. But in the nisbat-e a'la also, they were very unche. Our Qa'im, who is to come, they were many times unche than him. Our Qa'im who is to come, who is the jami' (collector) of all, the bahr-e zakhkhar (ocean of knowledge), they are much unche than him, and they... where are they coming? They are being born in Lanka. Of our qawr, the ibtida (beginning). Now, their 28th one, it's clear that if the 27 are equal to a patthar (stone), then this one is of the misl (likeness) of a yaqut (ruby). So now the nisbat (relation) that has been established here, you will have to understand that that 28th one will be the behtarin (best), and in nisbat, he will be much uncha (higher). So now, to differentiate this, we will keep giving him a naam (name). Now we will say this, that this one who is being born, who is the 28th, whom we consider the Imam-e Awwal (first Imam), or whom we call Qaym-rut-e A'zam, or whom we call the sabiq (precedent), or whom we call the jussa-e ibtida'iyyah (primary essence), or whom we call the jussa-e tabi'iyyah (natural essence), or the पहला Imam (first Imam), or whatever naam you give it, which I am telling you now. So that Imam-e Awwal who is coming, he is the 28th. It is clear that he, in terms of his sharafat (nobility) and 'azmat (greatness), is be-misl (peerless). In his place, he is be-misl, and the 27 are बिल्कुल हेच (absolutely nothing) before him. And those 27, although they are hech before him, they are many times greater than us. And there is no nisbat between us and those 27. These 27 afrad who were born there, nature created them in the same way, because the fitrat-e ilahiyyah (divine nature) wants to keep it ek (one). It does not want to change it. So our Prophet also came, he had the same aankh aur naak ka naqsha (features of eyes and nose), and our Amir al-Mu'minin also came, he had the same aankh aur naak ka naqsha, Fatima Zahra came, she had the same 'awraton ki kaifiyat (feminine features). So it does not want to bring any tabdili (change) in them. So in exactly the same way, their halat will also be the same, khana, pina, rahna, sahna (eating, drinking, living, bearing), everything, sardi, garmi (cold, heat), everything will be in the same way, as it is with us here. So in exactly the same way, those 27 afrad were also so unche afrad, and they were born with the same kaifiyat, in which all the newborns from the pits in the world had their own asarat (effects). Just as all the newborns from the pits in the world, the kaifiyaten (conditions) of mard and 'awrat were there, the same kaifiyat was theirs, whether they were 27 or 28. That is, as they were to be born, they were born in the same way. The farq (difference) was only ek. What was that farq? It was that the 28th one, we cannot count it, nature was counting it with its own qalam (pen). Nature had its shumar (count) of the 28th one. We didn't know. But we are learning and understanding it in an 'ilmi (knowledgeable) way. So it is clear that the halqa (circle) of 27 and their Imam, and that 28th one is the most fazil (virtuous) and the most... in the 'alam-e tabi'i (world of nature), he is in the muqabil (place) of 'aql (intellect). Just as there is the 'Aql-e Awwal (First Intellect), in the same way, in this 'alam-e duniya (world of the world), he stands in the muqabil of the 'Aql-e Awwal. So now, this one who was born, as soon as he came out of the pit, the very first kaam (work) he did was that he did sajda (prostration) to the rububiyyat (lordship) of Allah Ta'ala. This was the first sajda in the universe that happened. First. You will say, "Who taught him, who gave him this samajh-bujh (understanding)?" So the baat is that the cheez (thing) which he could not get there, this is a very aham cheez (important thing), listen carefully. The cheez which he could not get in kallamam, after coming here, in this 'alam-e dani (lowly world), when they changed from bil-quwwah to bil-fi'l (from potential to actual), they got that cheez from the 'ilm-e ma kana wa sa-yakun (knowledge of what was and what will be), which they had not gotten there. You understand? That is, the kallamam were made to stand in the darmiyan (middle), that we will neither include you there, nor are you fit to be sent to this 'alam. You have been made to stand in the darmiyan. So those who were made to stand in the darmiyan, these are the same kallamam who are coming to this 'alam. Now, how are they coming? This is a very bada sawal (big question), and a very aham sawal. And I will try to explain this to you as well. And I will. But what I have to tell you is that this is a very aham cheez to understand, how those kallamam came to this 'alam. You should not think, God forbid, that the kallamam came down here. It's not like that. Neither should you think this, nor that, that it is just a sayah (shadow). No. Neither should you think it's a sayah, nor should you think that they just came down. It didn't happen like that, nor like that, but it was something else, and I will present it to you in that way. But you should understand that these are the same kallamam who have attained the unche se unche maqam (highest of high positions) there, and their asar (effect) has been established, and the asar is the same thing that creates the shakl (form) and comes. There is a grapevine, you have picked grapes from it in the season, and you have eaten them. Now when the next season comes, grapes will grow again, and you will pick them again. So these grapes that are coming, those grapes and these grapes are not ek sa (the same), although angur (grape) is angur. So in exactly the same way, but what is it? That the asar that has been left, that asar will always phal la ke rahega (bear fruit). So in exactly the same way, that the asar cast from there is what is qaym (establishing) them. And they are being qaym. And when they are qaym, then it is clear that they also get that cheez, and nature gives it, that you have done nadamat there as kallamam, and you have done nadamat in such a way that no one has done nadamat. We had not done nadamat. They had said "yes" by not saying "no". And there was no doubt that they too would have been joined to the 'alam-e ruhani (spiritual world). They too would have had a sutuh (breakthrough), they would have been shamil (included). With whom? With the tenth, with the ninth, with anyone they would have been shamil. But what was the wajah (reason)? That the punishment had come, and the saza (sentence) had come down from there. For this reason, they were made to stand, and they stood. And it was said that you do one kaam, that the one whom you have called here, go and call him in the universe too. Here you have sentenced them, you have put them in jail. Now go into this universe as a jailer and take care of them. You will have to go as a jailer, and you will have to take care of them, you will have to give them hidayat (guidance), you will have to free them from this universe. So now, if they came to this universe, then just as a shikari (hunter) goes to a shikargah (hunting ground), to tame the shikar (prey), if he wears the libas (clothes) of a shikari, wears khaki libas, and puts ghas-pat (grass and leaves) on himself, then he doesn't become the shikar, God forbid. But the shikari remains the shikari, the shikar remains the shikar. But the nufus-e habitah (descending souls), they are coming to hunt them, and it's clear that they had to take this roop (form). And they came as mithlukum (like you). `Ana basharun mithlukum`, the Prophet said, "I am a bashar (human) like you." The Prophet did not say, "I am a bashar." This is a very tahalukah machane wala (controversial) ayat, which all Muslims say this, that on the mi'yar (scale) of insaniyat (humanity), the Prophet is in a mi'raj ki kaifiyat (state of ascension). Oh brother, what is insaniyat? For the Prophet, you want to see in terms of insaniyat. This is the reason for seeing the Prophet that insaniyat fell into the ghar-e mazallat (abyss of misguidance), and they started saying about the Prophet that he was a jahil nabi (ignorant prophet), God forbid, God forbid. All these Muslims consider the Prophet to be jahil. They had to accept him as ummi (unlettered). So these Muslims who measure on the mi'yar of insaniyat, they believe in the Nabi-e Ummi. So anyway, what I had to tell was that since those coming from there, these... since they are coming to shikar karne (hunt), they are coming as wardens, as jailers. For God's sake, don't consider them qaidi (prisoners). Don't consider them an insan like yourselves. And that's the truth. What happened in the time of the Prophet? The condition of the people was that they would come in the time of the Prophet, and they would sit looking at the surat (face) of the Prophet. After looking for a while, they would go out and go into the galiyon (streets) of Madinah, and what baten (conversations) would they have? "Oh brother, I am coming from the Prophet." "Oh, what happened?" "Oh brother, I saw, he is بالکل apne jaise hi hain (exactly like us)." The first jumla (sentence). He is like us. I saw him, he was khajur kha rahe the (eating dates). Exactly like us, he is eating. I saw him, he was bagh me phir rahe the (walking in the garden). Exactly like us, he is walking. I saw him, he was suk me chal rahe the (walking in the market). He is doing it just like us. So the Quran took this in its own alfaz (words): `ya'kuluna at-ta'ama wa yamshuna fi al-aswaq` (they eat food and walk in the markets). `Ma li-hadha ar-rasul` (What is wrong with this messenger?). What has happened to the messenger? That he eats and drinks like us, and in the same way, he walks in the bazar (market). There is no farq between him and us, in the rasul and us. So these were the zahir-bin musalman (outward-looking Muslims), who saw the rasul with their own ankhon (eyes), with these lehmi-shehmi ankhon (fleshy, fleshly eyes). So that is why Allah Ta'ala... a ayat came, this ayat struck their azhan (minds) so hard that they are still tadap rahe hain (writhing). What is that? `Wa tarahum yanzuruna ilayka wa hum la yubṣirun` (And you see them looking at you, but they do not see). "O Prophet, you see that they are looking at you," see, the word `tara` in Arabic also means to see. `Tubsirun` also means to see. `Yanzurun` also means to see. Allah Ta'ala has brought three words, and all three words are different, and all three have different meanings. What hikmat (wisdom) of the Lord! `Wa tarahum yanzuruna ilayka`, "O Prophet, you see that they are looking at you, but in haqiqat (reality), they do not see you." These andhe (blind), these of the eyes of the dil (heart) are andhe, what will they see you? With these lehmi-shehmi ankhon. They see nothing but the charbi wali ankh (fatty eye). They cannot see you at all. So the Quran itself refuted this. So it becomes clear that these... the prophets who were coming, so just as the Prophet, in the same way, a being much greater than the prophets.
