I had made a statement before you that regarding the story of Hazrat Adam *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam*, but I will always want your attention to always keep *Tamur* in consideration. That is the active field, it is the origin, it is the place of the *Masjudin* (those who are prostrated to), and everything… whatever is happening in this universe, who is its axis? It is the *Ka'ba-e-Ruhani* (Spiritual Ka'ba). Just as this is the *Ka'ba-e-Jismani* (Physical Ka'ba), the honor, status, loftiness, delicacy, and comprehensiveness that this Physical Ka'ba has obtained is purely due to that Spiritual Ka'ba, because the complete reflection of that Spiritual Ka'ba is falling upon the Physical Ka'ba. For this reason. So, *Tamur* has the greatest importance, where both *Nisbat-e-'Ala* (the Higher Connection) and *Nisbat-e-Adna* (the Lower Connection) are present. And they, one after the other, their successors become luminous, and in that active field, what happens? *Khilafats* (vicegerencies) are established. To establish *khilafat* means to come to service. They have been appointed to service. Why? Because they had said 'yes' after saying 'no'. After refusing, they... [unclear]... After refusing, they had affirmed. For this reason, service was imposed upon them, that now you have to serve one after the other. And you have to do it one after the other. And what was done? That there, in the *Nisbat-e-'Ala*, this condition was set: that the service you perform, that is established in the same manner, one after the other, you must do it in that way. And now, in whatever way the people of *Nisbat-e-Adna* have been established there, they will be in the same way. But for the *Nisbat-e-'Ala*, what form did *Qudrat* (Divine Power) set here? I have explained its entire chemistry to you, how their body is, what it is. For this reason, *Qudrat* kept this system: that for the Imam, this is the condition. Since he is the guide (*hadi*), the leader (*rahbar*), the master of the universe, the Lord of the Time (*Rabb-e-Waqt*), the God of the Time (*Khuda-e-Waqt*), for him, it is necessary that always after the father, the son... this chain will continue in the same way. And until the world is completely finished, this chain cannot break. It cannot break at all. So, this is a chain that *Qudrat* has established. And the chain of the Prophets (*Anbiya*) has been set in such a way that for them, it is not a condition to have a son after the father. For them, it is that just as *Qudrat* chose whomever it wished, the Imam chose whomever he wished, and made him. But what happens is that, in reality, they are the same ones who are there. You have to keep this in mind. And those who are there, they are called *Muhtajib* (veiled), meaning those who are hidden. And these are called *Hijab* (veils), meaning those who hide. These are called *Hijab*, and they are called *Muhtajib*. Those are the ones who remain behind a curtain; this is the curtain. That is the meaning; these are the words. You understand? So, they are the origin, and they establish an effect of theirs here. And that effect, it is apparent that *Qudrat* also wants them, 'You go into this world and do the work.' And this is also a difficult matter that *Qudrat* has imposed upon them, that you have no choice but to serve. So, if they are to perform the service, how should they do it? So they found a middle path, that we will use an effect of ours, and that effect will be in the form of the *Nafs-e-Hissiyah* (the sensory soul). And the *Nafs-e-Natiqah* (the rational soul) is their deputy. And for the *Nafs-e-Namiyah* (the vegetative soul) and for their body, what arrangement was made? All the *Nafs-e-Namiyah* of the believers, after their death, after their burial, after the three days in the grave, what emerges, that *Namiyah* which is called *Ridiya*, their body will be formed from that *Ridiya*. So, it becomes known that if we see the Imam, then we are seeing ourselves. It is for this reason that the Noble Prophet (*Nabi-e-Karim*) had said that *lata'ifuna*... *lata'ifu shi'atina... wa kas... lata'ifu shi'atina ka-kasa'ifina* (The subtle bodies of our Shia are like our dense bodies). That the subtle bodies (*lataif*) of our Shia are our dense bodies (*kasaif*). *Kasaif* means the body. And I had told you that just as we have power over our clothes, that we can take off our clothes whenever we want and wear other clothes, they have that much power over their bodies. And they have so much power that in a thousandth of a second, they can be somewhere else entirely. It is not known how many there are; it cannot even be estimated. And to understand this, how many Imams changed and what happened and how they changed, then you should see: we go to see a film. Our eyes are on the screen. You, you watch the film. Hey brother, it's loaded in the projector, watch the film! No, you turn your back on the projector. You look towards the screen, because you just have to see the screen. Now what happens on the screen? You should understand that you see a figure. And you started looking at that figure, and now your gaze is fixed on that figure, and it is moving, it is doing some work, or it is saying something, everything is happening. And you are looking at that figure, and you are happy or whatever you are doing, you are doing it. And what is happening behind? That projector, if you go near it and look, you will see that for that same person, reel after reel has passed. A thousand pictures have passed, and there on the screen, you are seeing only one person. It becomes known that it has movement; every movement has a picture, and you are seeing it with that movement. But in reality, what is to be told, the example to be given is this, the example is that there is only one point of comparison. And the point of comparison is only this: that behind the screen, so many have changed, but in front, you saw only one thing. So, in the same way, the Imams (*A'immah*) and the Friends of Allah (*Awliya' Allah*), for them... So, in the same way, the Imams (*A'immah*) and the Friends of Allah (*Awliya' Allah*), for them, you should understand, there are tremendous realities. We are thinking, 'Oh, they have fallen ill!' 'Oh, they are being killed!' Alas! You see, the entire Islamic world... May God ask these people, may God ask the Islamic world, you just reflect that He who, in the Qur'an Majid, stated so explicitly, and on the tongue of the Prophet. One must remember this matter. I am wielding such a big axe now that after this, Islam... no one will be able to stand up. That in the Qur'an Majid, this reality is coming, and He is stating that Allah Ta'ala performed this marvel, that for only one Prophet, He made this statement. He did not say it for all the prophets. But what did He say? He said a strange thing. What did He say? For Hazrat 'Isa, He said that *wa ma qataluhu wa ma salabuhu wa lakin shubbiha lahum* (and they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, but [another] was made to resemble him for them). I thought that this incident, when Hazrat 'Isa's station comes, I will explain it then. But since the topic has come up, I am speaking. That you did not... Allah Ta'ala says that the people did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, but Hazrat 'Isa was made to resemble another (*tashbih kar di gayi*). Or the people were put into doubt. *Shubbiha lahum* has both meanings: a resemblance was made, and they were put into doubt. The people thought they were giving it to 'Isa, but they were not giving it to Hazrat 'Isa. First point. And the second point is, if they were put into doubt, what does that mean? It means the same thing, that some other person was crucified, he was not. So, they were in doubt about this too. So, whether you take the meaning of doubt or the meaning of resemblance, it is the same thing. So, now you see that when all the Muslims are asked, they say that Allah has clarified about 'Isa *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam* in the Qur'an Majid: *bal rafa'ahu Allahu ilayh* (rather, Allah raised him to Himself). Allah raised him high towards Himself. So when it is clearly stated, it means he was not crucified. And do you believe that Hazrat 'Isa was crucified? In three sects... people are divided into three classes. One says that Hazrat 'Isa was crucified. The second says that Hazrat 'Isa was not crucified. And one says that Hazrat 'Isa was indeed crucified, but when his body was taken down, there was a spark of life left, and his disciples took him and fled, and went straight to where? To Kashmir. In India's Kashmir they reached. And going to Kashmir, they raised and cared for Hazrat 'Isa, and there Hazrat 'Isa then lived his life and after staying there, you... Now this is the belief of the Qadianis (Ahmadis). There is a reality in this too. There is a reality in that one, and a reality in that one too. But there is some reality, a little bit. But what is the correct matter? The correct matter is this, that now this, which Allah Ta'ala says, that they did not kill him, did not crucify him, then where was Adam killed, brother? Where was Nuh killed? Where was Musa killed? Where was 'Isa killed? No one was killed, no one was buried. Did you understand? By speaking for one Prophet, he has alluded to all the Prophets. For our Prophet Karim, the Seal of the Messengers (*Khatm al-Mursalin*), what will you say? *Hayat al-Nabi* (the life of the Prophet), *Hayat al-Nabi*, they chant this slogan a lot. But do they also understand what is meant by *Hayat al-Nabi*? So, *Insha'Allah*... But you are understanding this matter, that it is a matter of great depth, a very profound matter. That this is that when a person, when for the Prophet *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam*, Allah Ta'ala is saying, look in the Qur'an Sharif: *innaka mayyitun wa innahum la-mayyitun* (Indeed, you are to die, and indeed, they are to die). O Prophet, you are going to pass away, and everyone has to go from this world. When the Master of the Universe (*Sarwar-e-Kainat*), the Chief of the Prophets (*Sayyid al-Anbiya*), is passing away, then what power does Hazrat 'Isa have? What power does Hazrat 'Isa have? Can he, God forbid, be equal to the Prophet? So what can it mean? It means the same thing, that there is some depth. It is a resemblance (*tashbih*). To inflict such torment on the *Awliya' Allah*... this cannot happen. It is among the impossible things. How can there be torment? Neither illness, nor disease, nor murder, nor plunder, nor neither arrow, nor dagger, nor this, nor that... nothing can happen. Today, the entire Shi'ism that is established, it is on Karbala. This much wailing, this bloody mourning (*khuni matam*) that they do, why do they do this mourning? What, Imam Husayn? The one whose slaves are such prophets... the Husayn whose slaves are such prophets... could they, God forbid, God forbid, kill that Imam Husayn *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam*? Could this Karbala have happened? Today, if this Karbala is taken away from the Shias, then Shi'ism is finished. They are sitting holding onto the entire Karbala, and the Shias are remaining. But what is the reality? But you will say, then what is all this, this Karbala? The grief that we narrate... Of course, we grieve, we do *matam* (mourning). We do *matam* for this reason, look, one must understand the reality properly. We do *matam* for this reason, that the one whom they killed, they killed him thinking he was Husayn. He was not Husayn. But this world thought he was Husayn and killed him. We cry for this reason. If, in reality, God did not want to save him, then they would have actually killed Imam Husayn. But Allah saved him. And with one example in the Qur'an, he clarified the whole matter, solved the entire issue: *wa ma qataluhu wa ma salabuhu wa lakin shubbiha lahum*. Did you understand? Is the point becoming clear? So, in one statement, the entire matter was clarified. Now these are great depths. Then if he is not killed, then how does it happen, what happens, then what about the children, what about them, what about the sick... These are great details. For now, if you suddenly say that I should get everything, it cannot come. But slowly, you will understand. However, you are understanding some part of the matter, that there are some deep matters. Some deep matters. And one is to be an Imam, to be a leader, to become the guide of the whole world, for all people to send blessings and peace upon him, and then for him to be tormented... what, the Prophet *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam* was tied to a hot stone, stones were thrown at him, this and that was done. God forbid, can such a thing happen to the Mercy to the Worlds (*Rahmat lil 'Alamin*)? Not a chance! The one in whose control divinity is, that servant... you are seeing that the one before whom the entire universe was bowed, that being... could these people inflict harm upon him? Then what happened? Then why did the Prophet say, *ma udhiya nabiyyun mithla ma udhitu* (No prophet was tormented as I was tormented)? If he had not said this, then how would we, as common people, have formed a *sirah* (biography)? How would we receive guidance? For this reason, the Prophet presented the *sirah* of a human being before us. But these are very deep matters. These are very deep matters. This is just the beginning of the time that such things are coming before you, otherwise all these things are hidden secrets (*raz-ha-ye-niha*). This is *'Ilm al-Ladunni* (divinely-inspired knowledge). Very deep secrets. Anyway, for now, I was sitting before you with the story of Janab Adam *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam*. And it was related to Janab Hunayd, who was your uncle. And he was the Imam of the time, and there in *Tamur*, his point emerged. And first in that era was Janab Hunayd, who came as the Imam. And he appointed his nephew. Now you will say, this relationship... This relationship, these are common things, leave them aside. Leave this matter. It is neither a matter of relation nor of connection. Whoever is worthy, he will come to that place. And you, Janab Adam, who were there... what was his name? His name was Janab 'Abdullah. 'Abdullah was his name, and his father's name was Kanjum, and his grandfather's name was Qauljan. And he was from Shahabad, a resident of an area in Lanka, and Zayqah was the name of his tribe. And he must have had some wife too, Janab Adam. But the Janab Hawwa, Janab Hawwa whose name is said to be your wife, Ummana Hawwa, Ummana Hawwa (our mother Eve), who is that Amma Hawwa? In reality, she is your son Habil, who is also your *wasi* (successor). She is your son Habil, who is also your *wasi* and your caliph, who was made the caliph. And when Janab Adam was being trained, he was studying the *shari'ah*, the *da'wah* was established... the whole... the *dawr-e-kashf* (era of unveiling) was ending, the *dawr-e-satr* (era of concealment) was beginning, and Janab Adam... what happened then? That at that time, Mawlana Hunayd, before his people of *da'wah*... these people of *da'wah* are called *mala'ikah* (angels). *Mala'ikah* means, etymologically, one to whom some task is entrusted is called a *mala'ikah*. *Mala'ikah* does not mean that winged angels are flying around. Yes, the heavenly angels, they are *mala'ikah*. So those who are physical are called *malak*, and the one who... the physical one is called *malik*, and the one who is... is called *malak*. There isn't much difference. And these who were the *mala'ikah*... *wa is qala rabbuka lil-mala'ikati inni ja'ilun fil-ardi khalifah* (And when your Lord said to the angels, 'Indeed, I will make upon the earth a successive authority'). That when Allah Ta'ala said to the *mala'ikah*, 'I want to make my caliph among you.' This was the first voice that echoed. *wa is qala rabbuka lil-mala'ikati inni ja'ilun fil-ardi khalifah*, 'I want to make my caliph on the earth'. Now you see what commotions, what rivers are being made to flow, what speeches, what gatherings... that a caliph is being established, this is... what, Allah's... Allah's representative is being made a human. Look at the personality of a human, and look at the personality of Allah. Where is the connection? What, a caliph is being made? This human who sheds blood, who creates commotion... what, does a human have any standing to become the caliph of Allah? It makes no sense. Then what was the meaning of this, 'becoming a caliph'? 'Allah' there means Janab Hunayd. As I told you, this is a technical term (*istilahi lafz*). Every thing will keep changing. In its own place, it has a spiritual meaning. There, technically, 'Allah' refers to Janab Hunayd, who was the God of the Time. He desired, and he said, 'I want to make my caliph, I want to make someone a prophet and manifest him.' And he pointed towards Janab Adam. Who was your nephew. Now what happened? That when Allah Ta'ala began to prepare Janab Adam, how was the preparation? Allah Ta'ala says about it in the Qur'an Majid, *wa 'allama Adama al-asma'a kullaha* (And He taught Adam the names - all of them). That Adam was taught all the names by Allah Ta'ala. Pick up the commentaries and see. What are all the commentaries filled with? That all the things in the heavens and the earth, the names of all those things were taught to whom? To Janab Adam. Just look at the things, and look at their names, and look at this list... that this is a hat, this is a shoe, this is bread, this is food, this is a curtain, this is a chandelier... these names. Pick up and see the commentaries. So, they say this, that... now if they go into great detail, what do they do? They wrap up their point like this: 'heavens and earth'. What things are there in the heavens and earth? It is just this climate and atmosphere. It is just these things, what else is there? So, the names of all these things were taught. Adam, poor fellow, didn't know. He was told, 'This is a cloud, Adam, this is a pebble, this is a stone, this is bread, this is that, this is a bush...' All this was taught to Janab Adam. When Adam had learned it well... *'allama Adama al-asma'a kullaha*, he learned all the names. Now they were presented... *'aradahum 'alayhim*... and he was presented before the *mala'ikah*, and it was said that, *anbi'uni bi-asma'i ha'ula'* (Inform me of the names of these). O *mala'ikah*, tell me the names. The names that we have told, list those names. *qala la 'ilma lana illa ma 'allamtana* (They said, 'We have no knowledge except what You have taught us'). O Lord, we... *ma 'allamtana illa ma 'allamtana*... our knowledge is only that, O Allah, which you have taught us. Whatever you have taught us, we know that. Now, have you ever seen an exam like this? The *mala'ikah* were not taught. Adam was taught. And then the *mala'ikah* are being asked to tell the names. Is an exam ever like this? The exam happens after the teaching. The poor *mala'ikah*, they were not told. Except for Adam. And the exam is of whom? Of the *mala'ikah*. Let the Muslims answer this. What will they say? And he was asked, 'Tell the names.' So they said plainly, *ma 'ilma lana illa ma 'allamtana*. 'O Lord, whatever knowledge you have given us, we only know that much, we don't know anything besides that'. So Allah Ta'ala said, 'Didn't I tell you correctly that *inni a'lamu ma la ta'lamun* (Indeed, I know that which you do not know)? I know what you do not know'. Look! What anger from Allah! What does this mean? These are all things to be understood. And after that, what happened? When this whole incident took place... *qala lil-mala'ikati sjudu li-Adama* (He said to the angels, 'Prostrate to Adam'). When Adam won and he listed all the names, Allah Ta'ala said... first listen to the story. He... Allah Ta'ala gave the order to the *mala'ikah* for Adam... *sjudu li-Adama* (Prostrate to Adam). 'Prostrate to Adam.' *illa Iblisa aba wa-stakbara wa kana min al-kafirin* (except for Iblis. He refused and was arrogant and became of the disbelievers). And he refused, and... he became of the disbelievers. The one who refused, he was declared a disbeliever, and that's how it happened. This is a strange thing. And all these things... The meaning there is that Adam *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam* was taught... those 'names' meant the secrets of the *da'wah*. They were the secrets of the *da'wah* which were taught to him. And the matters which are told to those of the rank of prophethood (*nubuwwat*) and messengership (*risalat*), those were taught to him. It is obvious that the *mala'ikah* were not aware of all those secrets. So they said that 'we are not aware of these secrets'. So Janab Hunayd said, 'This is why we say that the one who is worthy has been told, and you do not know'. And now there is a need for the one who knows to always have superiority over the one who does not know. The one who knows has superiority over the one who does not know, always. And he has been chosen for this reason, that he was worthy of it. And you obey him. 'Prostrate' means to obey. The command was to obey. 'Prostrate' did not mean this, to do this prostration. The prostration that is... that is obedience. The command was to obey. 'Obey.' And as soon as the command to obey was given, all the *mala'ikah* said that 'we all prostrated', meaning we obeyed. They said, 'Your command, we accept it with our head and eyes'. You have appointed him, we accept. *aba wa-stakbara wa kana min al-kafirin*. Azazil, who was *Malak al-Mawt* (Angel of Death), who is called *Mu'allim al-Malakut* (Teacher of the Angelic Realm), who had studied the great realities (*haqaiq*), who had said that *khalaqtani min narin wa khalaqtahu min tin* (You created me from fire, and him You created from clay), that I am made of fire and Adam is made of clay. Meaning, I have studied the *haqaiq*, and Adam has studied the *shari'ah*. And you are appointing this *shari'ah*-studying child as a great prophet and messenger, and I was so worthy, I had studied the *haqaiq*... So the Lord of the Universe said, 'The question is not about knowing the *haqaiq* or not knowing them. First was the command to obey. How are you refusing my command?' As soon as he refused the command, he was told, 'Get out from my court. Get out now, *innaka rajim* (you are accursed).' You are the accursed of the *da'wah*. He was expelled from the *da'wah*. From the mission of the *da'wah* and from that place, he was expelled. And that shaytan was expelled, and that shaytan, I am telling you, is a personality. He is a personality. And he was the one who, in the *'Alam-e-Azal* (Pre-Eternal World), was the one who led the group of 'Asir astray. His origin is from there. It was him that *Qudrat* had created. And this was a person named Murrah, and his son was named Harith. I am telling you the name of shaytan. The name of shaytan... his name is Harith, and his father's name is Murrah. This was him. And he did shaytani there, and he came here and did shaytani. And as soon as he did shaytani, he was made accursed of the *da'wah*. Now Janab Adam... now you see, a marvel, that 'he became of the *kafirin*'. *min al-kafirin*. What is the meaning of *kafirin*? *Kafirin* means... *kafir* means one who covers. One who covers. He knew everything, what great status Adam had. But despite that, he covered his status, he hid it. This is the meaning of *min al-kafirin*. You understand? Okay. And then what happened? That Allah Ta'ala says that you... in this garden of paradise, walk, roam, eat the fruits... there are rivers flowing, live with ease and comfort, eat, drink, enjoy. All this that Allah Ta'ala addressed to Adam and Janab Hawwa, and in this way... so Janab Adam, all these things to eat... as I told you, what are these pleasures and all these things? They are books. They are the sciences of the *da'wah*, they are rivers. 'Benefit from these. Benefit from all these things you can eat.' And Janab Adam began to benefit from those things. But what happened? And after that, the command of Allah Ta'ala is coming, look, listen. What is the command of Allah Ta'ala? *wa la taqraba hadhihi al-shajarata fa takuna min al-zalimin* (and do not approach this tree, lest you be among the wrongdoers). 'Look, Adam, do everything, but I am saying this for you and Hawwa'. And who is that Hawwa? The son, Habil, who is your *wasi*. 'I am telling you, beware, do not go near this tree of spirituality, in which the sublime realities are kept'. Those are the hidden secrets of Amir al-Mu'minin. Those are the hidden secrets of the coming Qa'im al-Qiyamah. 'Beware, do not touch these things yet'. 'We want to give you everything, but on its time, not now.' And what happened here? The temptation was so much that Janab Adam and Janab Hawwa... Habil... what did they do? And they ate it. And Allah Ta'ala says, 'If you eat, you will become of the wrongdoers (*zalimin*).' So what happened? Both of them ate the fruit. So now what is it? It is a condition and its consequence. 'If you do this, I will do that.' It means since you did this, I did that. Allah Ta'ala is saying that 'if you eat in this way, you will become of the *zalimin*.' So now, did Janab Adam and Hawwa become *zalimin* or not? And is it obligatory (*farz*) to obey the *zalimin*? Can we, God forbid, obey a wrongdoing prophet? This was the one question... that the great Muslims who had come to Sindh... the questioner asked this question... and they had to flee. This was the question. Tell me. So, the meaning was that there, you will not be among those who do justice (*'adl*). 'Look, it will happen that you will not be able to benefit from those bounties then.' And this is what happened. A command was given for Janab Adam to leave from there. He was with the Imam. He was in the presence of the Imam *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam*, and Adam was expelled, and his Hawwa, meaning Habil, was also expelled. Now both of them left from there. And they are saying that... mother Hawwa fell in Jeddah, and he fell somewhere on a mountain. What is this... is this some kind of show of throwing from above and a spectacle? These are all stories. Now after that... now this... leaving from there, what happened? They had to come to the islands (*jaza'ir*). The islands (*jazirah*), as you know, I have already told you about the twelve islands where the establishment of faith (*iman*) takes place. And there the people of faith keep being born. They were sent there, that 'go and now endure everything there'. 'Endure hardships, because doing *da'wah* there, doing *da'wah* on the island, is very difficult. The presence of the Imam... there the sun has risen, everything is illuminated, and everything happens by the command of the Imam, and all things are clear.' 'Now this is the darkness of night. The matter of the islands is a very difficult matter. Someone believes, someone doesn't believe, someone is like this, someone is like that... endure the affairs of this tribulation. Now, going there, you people will work in the island, then you will realize.' Adam *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam* was in the presence of the Imam, but he was removed from the presence and sent to the island. This was the punishment for Janab Adam. And he had to go and work on the island. And he kept working there. Now this... and the one who tormented, who tempted, who did all this, who was he? It was this shaytan. And shaytan... is Azazil, who is called *Mu'allim al-Malakut*, who is the son of a person named Murrah. And he is the same whose origin is from there. He caused mischief there, and he came here and caused mischief and troubled this Adam too. Are you getting the story? So, now when the matter of Janab Adam happened in this way, then Hazrat Adam *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam*, whose name was Janab 'Abdullah, Janab 'Abdullah established his prophethood and messengership, and as long as your time of service was, you kept serving. Approximately one thousand years had passed. And now, those Imams who were to be in the progeny of Janab Hunayd, were happening one after the other. Their names are also present. Their names are very strange... Farshaj, Yalu... such strange names that you will not be able to understand. Anyway, all such names passed, and all the Imams passed away after Janab Hunayd. Happening, happening, after a thousand years had passed, the Imam who came at that time, what was his name? Mawlana Hud. Hud was his name. A prophet named Hud has also passed. A prophet named Hud has also passed. We are not concerned with that prophet. This is the Imam. And that Imam Hud, who was the Imam of his time, who was from the progeny of Janab Hunayd. He saw that 'I am the Master of the Time (*Sahib-e-Waqt*), the Ruler of the Time (*Aqa-e-Waqt*), the Imam of the Time. Now I need to send a prophet-messenger into the world so that he can go into the world and enforce a *shari'ah* like this, and as a speaking prophet (*natiq nabi*), he can do the work in the world.' So what did he do? He looked in his time and saw, 'Whom should I make now?' So he began to look within his *da'wah*, and looking, he chose one person whose name was 'Abd al-Ghaffar. 'Abd al-Ghaffar was his name. And Janab 'Abd al-Ghaffar, who was of a very old age, was frail. He took this frail elder and said, 'I bestow upon you prophethood and messengership, and now you manifest in the world as a prophet.' So when he came into this world as a prophet... 'coming as a prophet' does not mean coming from above. This whole matter is happening right here. And he came into the world, meaning he came to Sham, or Palestine, or Iraq, wherever he came, and after coming, what did he do? He challenged his people and said, 'Look, I have been made a prophet.' Just as our Prophet gave the command and challenged, in the same way, he said, 'I have been made a prophet. Believe my words, come towards my *shari'ah*, attach yourself to Allah, prepare for the hereafter, turn away from the world.' He began to explain all these things. Now, as soon as Janab Nuh started to explain, what was the situation? The people of Nuh started to argue with him. And this arguing is such a thing... what can be said of a people? Someone instigated them, and the entire people got agitated and started to fight with Janab Nuh. Why? What was happening? In the time of Janab Adam, there were just delusions (*tawahhumat*), only superstitions. But when the time of Nuh came, a thousand years had passed, now symbols (*simbuls*) had been created. Now the inclination towards idol worship had begun. Now the worship of stars had started. Now their inclination was towards such things. And the people of Janab Nuh, what did they do? They started a great commotion and said, 'This is a strange man. He calls us to worship an unseen God.' 'And we will never believe this. We are worshipping our idols with so much effort and worshipping the stars. It is better that we worship these.' As soon as the people started to do this, at that very time, Janab Nuh started to challenge them. And his long and detailed story is present in the Qur'an Majid. If you pick up Surah Nuh and read it, you will find that he tried to call his people, as Janab Nuh says, 'O Allah, the more I call my people near, the farther they run away from me.' 'What should I do, my Allah?' Now to whom is this 'Allah' being addressed? To Janab Hud. Addressing Janab Hud, he is saying, 'My Mawla, what should I do? I am calling them, but my people are not ready to believe.' 'They are not pleased with me. I am tired of explaining to them, but they are not ready to worship you. This people. Now what happened? Janab Nuh... he started to call out so much, he started to lament so much (*nauhe karne lage*), that from his lamentations (*nauhon*), he became Nuh. Did you understand? These are lamentations. From lamentations, Nuh was formed, meaning the one who laments. This was Hazrat Nuh. Otherwise, his name is 'Abd al-Ghaffar. So 'Abd al-Ghaffar, who was known by the name of Janab Nuh, became Nuh by lamenting, lamenting. And he lamented so much that finally, when he saw that the people were not ready to believe, one incident greatly troubled Janab Nuh. One time, Hazrat Nuh was doing some farming. He was farming on a small piece of land. And from there, an old man was passing by, who was carrying his little child in his arms. This story is not in the Qur'an Majid, but its mention is found in other heavenly books. So he was carrying the child and going. As soon as the child saw Janab Nuh, now among the children, what had happened? Janab Nuh had become a plaything and a joke. And to throw stones, to call him mad, to say something or other to him, to call him by some name or other, this had become the pastime of the people, of the children, it had become a game. And he was a frail old man. So the child said to his old father, 'O father, just put me down from your arms. I want to throw a stone at this old man.' So that father said, 'O child, why do you want to throw it now? You are still a child. When you grow up, then you can throw it.' The child said, 'Father, will they even be around until I grow up?' 'They will be finished. My wish will remain unfulfilled, that I couldn't throw a stone. So it's better if I throw it now.' So you see, this was the condition of that people. For this reason, Janab Nuh had become disheartened. He was being stoned, he was being called mad. The Prophet *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam* was called a poet, a magician, a madman, this and that. This did not just happen to the Prophet; it has happened to every prophet. Hazrat Nuh was also troubled and said, *Rabbi la tadhar 'ala al-ardi min al-kafirina dayyara* (My Lord, leave not upon the earth from among the disbelievers an inhabitant). 'O Lord, now do not leave any of the disbelievers behind. Wipe them all from the face of the earth.' He cursed them. Who? Hazrat Nuh. The extremity of his lament was this, that *Rabbi la tadhar 'ala al-ardi min al-kafirina dayyara*. 'O Lord, do not leave anyone behind now.' 'Do not leave even one of the disbelievers. Wipe them all out, annihilate them.' As soon as this challenge came from Janab Nuh, Janab Hud heard his call and said, 'O Nuh, you have called upon me, so how can I not listen to you? I will definitely listen.' 'It's a good thing, it's a good thing, I am listening to you, and a punishment will definitely befall them. And now a coming punishment will engulf them.' And Janab Hud listened to him. And this was Janab Hud. Look, the first thing you must remember is this, that all the stories (*qisas*) and all the incidents that are in the Qur'an Majid, you should know this about them, that many incidents of Janab Adam, or Nuh, or Ibrahim, or any prophet, have happened in the exoteric (*zahir*) and in the esoteric (*batin*). There are many incidents that happened only in the esoteric and not in the exoteric. There are many incidents that happened only in the exoteric and not in the esoteric. So there are three kinds of incidents. This incident of Janab Nuh, it is an incident that happened in the exoteric and in the esoteric. What happened in the exoteric? That Hazrat Hud gave the command that, 'Nuh, build an ark (*kishti*).' He started to build an ark. Now you see the commotion of the world... 'This ark is coming out, so it's Nuh's ark. That ark is found, it's Nuh's ark. A plank is found there, it's a plank from Nuh's ark.' What will they do with all this? Anyway, Janab Nuh started to build the ark. He built the ark. Now what? He said, 'A flood is coming.' And he said, 'A flood is coming, that's why I am building an ark. Whoever boards it will be saved, and whoever doesn't will be drowned. And for God's sake, you people come into the ark and let me build it.' And Janab Nuh kept building his ark. So it became known that Janab Nuh kept doing a task by the command of his Master. Okay, he kept doing it. So exoterically, this was it. What was it in the esoteric? Hazrat Sam, who is your son, he was your *wasi*. And to accept him as *wasi* and to announce his successorship (*wasayat*)... you did, and you announced that 'after me, my son Sam is the *wasi*'. His brother, his name was Ham. Ham got agitated and said, 'How have you appointed Sam as the *wasi*? This is my right.' A conflict arose between the two brothers, just as it arose there between Habil and Qabil. Adam's two sons, Habil and Qabil. You had made Janab Habil the *wasi*. You had not given the successorship to Qabil, and he became agitated. And what did he do? He presented an offering (*nazar*), and that offering was the sacrifice of a cow. And Habil's was accepted, and Qabil's was not accepted. Upon which, he picked up a stone and hit him, and his head split, and Janab Habil passed away. This is the exoteric story. The esoteric story was that when Janab Adam made Habil, his son, who had also been your teacher, his caliph, then when you took over the caliphate, Qabil could not bear it and wanted to kill you, that he should snatch away that appointment (*nass*) and stop your *da'wah* that was happening. So 'to pass away', 'to kill' means what? To stop from the *da'wah*. To stop from calling towards Allah, this is the meaning. So just as it happened there, in the same way, here Ham, what did he do? He said, 'No, brother. There is no need to kill Janab Nuh.' And he was his own son. And the situation was that Janab Nuh was explaining to whom? To Ham. The disbelieving son. Now what happened when the ark was ready? The exoteric story. Listen to the exoteric story. The flood came, and the flood emerged from the mosque of Kufa. That place exists even today, from where the flood of Nuh emerged. *Tannur*. From that oven (*tannur*), the water came out. And that water is still present today. And after it came out, what happened? It drowned the whole world, that water. And as all... you see that... believe in all things, and the flood of Nuh came. And after the flood came, the ark of Janab Nuh sailed. Now, before the flood of Janab Nuh, a command was given, 'O Nuh, from every pair, you take them here. If all these get drowned, what will remain of creation?' Did you understand? So what did Janab Nuh do? A pair of elephants, a pair of camels, a pair of lions, a pair of tigers, a pair of snakes... all good and bad animals, you gathered them. Now the ark of Janab Nuh is sailing, having gathered all the animals. Does your intellect even accept that he gathered the animals and left? So there, for Janab Nuh, the command to gather the animals was this: 'Look, in your *da'wah*, there are some with an Islamic form and some with a faithful form. Some are a bit exoteric, some are understanding the esoteric very well. Take both of these.' 'This pair-pair, you should keep them here so that from the faithful root, faith may also enter into them.' This was it. 'From your *da'wah*, you should not only take the people of faith into your ark, do not do this. Take the people of Islam too.' And what happens is that what is its pair, its quality (*sifat*) is always there. The quality of bravery that you have, this is your pair. Your pair does not mean that your female, your wife, is your pair. That is just an exoteric pair. But your real pair is your quality. You understand? So... and you see, more than anything else is this matter. Today, all the Muslims believe that he took the pairs and gathered the animals. Okay, fine, he took the animals. Brother, tell me, what was the wisdom in this? Let any Muslim give the answer. What was the wisdom in this, that he took so many animals and wanted to save them, Janab Nuh? Was it by the command of the Lord or not? Yes, brother, it was by the command of Allah, and by his command, he took the pairs. Well, if it was by the command of Allah, then is Allah not *innallaha 'ala kulli shay'in qadir* (Indeed, Allah is over all things competent)? Is Allah all-powerful or not? When he has the power, could he not create them again? Why was this command given, 'Fill this ark and sink the ark with the weight'? Why was the command given? Does Allah not have the power to create them again? And if this ark was sailing for six months, as it is in all the traditions, then how much fodder would be needed for six months? And all animals eat different things. Where did it come from? Is this a matter of some sense? This is not it at all. So the matter was this, that he gathered people from his *da'wah* and set off. And the ark reached Judi, and there you gave the command for a fast, and this is all the exoteric story. The esoteric story is that a crisis came in the *da'wah*, and Ham started to oppose you. Exoterically, when Ham... when the ark was sailing, Ham... you called out to him, he had climbed a mountain. The Qur'an Majid describes this. And you, Janab Nuh, called out, 'O Ham, you come too. Look, this mountain... and he said, 'No, the mountain is enough to give me refuge. You go, with the ark. I am not coming into the ark.' Meaning, he was telling him, 'Nuh, look, accept your brother Sam. He is my *wasi*.' But Ham was not believing. You said, 'Look, if you don't believe, you will be... drowned.' And what happened? Despite being on the mountain, meaning he remained firm in his own knowledge, but he was drowned. Meaning, his knowledge was of no use, and he was not capable of answering anyone. Meaning, he was drowned in his own knowledge. His knowledge was nothing at all. The real knowledge was *'Ilm al-Ladunni*, which was with Janab Sam. This is the incident of Janab Nuh, which happened to Janab Nuh, and Janab Nuh proceeded in this way. So now, in what manner have these people presented this incident? How have the Muslims seen it? They have seen the flood of Nuh in this way, and they have seen the matters in this way, and neither did they understand the *da'wah*, nor the refusal of the *da'wah*, nor the affirmation of the *da'wah*. They did not understand any part of the matter properly. So now, Hazrat Nuh, who had become Nuh by lamenting, lamenting... and Hazrat Nuh, whose name was 'Abd al-Ghaffar, he had reached the limit in his teaching (*talqin*). He was constantly teaching, he was explaining to his community, he was constantly trying to bring them to the right path, but the believers were not believing. But having become weary, what did Janab Nuh do? Finally, you... called for the divine punishment. Due to which this divine punishment came. *Rabbi la tadhar 'ala al-ardi min al-kafirina dayyara*. 'O Allah, now do not leave any of the disbelievers behind.' And thus, the ghat was prepared. What does it mean to 'prepare the ghat'? It means this, that 'O Allah, the forms you have given them, as humans, they are not worthy of being humans now, O Lord.' 'Put them back to death and keep them aside. And now there is no need to bring them into the form of humans. Bring them later. They are not going to be straightened out now.' Allah Ta'ala accepted his word, and they were drowned. So this was the incident of Hazrat Nuh *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam*, and this was the story of Hazrat Nuh. And Hazrat Hud was the Imam of that time, and the Master of that Time, and Janab Nuh was his... his messenger, his prophet, who came. Now the matters of the initial *shari'ah*... Janab Adam was given the initial *shari'ah* by Janab Hunayd, the Imam *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam*, his uncle. And he had explained that 'look, you should adhere to all these things.' So the beginning is always unique. It is not that it will be a completely formed shape, just as we have the complete law, the complete forms of worship, and all things, it will be like that. It was not like that. It was an initial form. Perhaps a few things he had told for prayer, for fasting. Fasting was certainly there. In the time of Janab Nuh, there was fasting, and in the time of Janab Adam, there was fasting. And prayer was also present. Prayer is such an obligation of Islam that it has been established from the very beginning. But its forms have kept changing. Its forms have changed in the era of every prophet. We have no mention of what its forms were then. But as we see, in the time of Hazrat 'Isa, there are mentions of kneeling down, so these are forms. And the methods of worship have kept changing. But its complete form came with the Master of the Universe, the Prophet *'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam*, and you codified it and organized the religion. But before that, there was no such situation. But gradually, slowly, the situations developed. So I was telling you that now, in the story of Hazrat Nuh, only one matter remains, and that is his blessed age. Now regarding his blessed age, what Allah Ta'ala has said in the Qur'an Majid, that he was 900 years old... in reality, what is that? Was Hazrat Nuh's age 900 years? You just see, a person's age is 900... and if he goes above 100, they will say, 'May Allah grant him a quick death, that would be better.' What is the use? Neither are the eyes capable of seeing, nor are the intestines capable of digesting. For what reason? So just as this situation... 100-125 years is a lot, take 150 years. Now this age of 900 years, what is the meaning of this? So Allah Ta'ala, why did he mention it? The matter was this: that is your... your era, your period. It is your period, which was approximately a thousand years...
