Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. Wa bihi nasta'in wa sallallahu 'ala Rasulihi Sayyidina Muhammadin wa aali Muhammadin wa barik wa sallim (In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. And in Him we seek help, and may Allah's blessings and peace be upon His Messenger, our Master Muhammad, and the family of Muhammad).

This... these two are the counterparts of the Kalima-e-Shahadat that you had mentioned. Sayyidna Ali bin Hibatullah has said... they say that, "fa-sun hadha al-sirr al-masun" (so guard this protected secret). So, protect this... this preserved secret. "yasunaka Allah" (Allah will protect you). "wa-hfaz ma ulqiya ilayka" (and preserve what has been cast upon you). And protect whatever has been cast upon you. "yahfazaka Allah" (Allah will protect you). "wa hadha min al-asrar al-'izam allati la yakad yastur bi'l-aqlam" (And this is among the great secrets which can scarcely be written by pens). And these are matters from the great, magnificent secrets, such that they cannot be written down with pens. "wa dhalika mimma ajrahu" (and that is from what He has caused to flow). And this matter... whatever I have written, it is because my Mawla and your Mawla made it flow upon my tongue. Meaning Sayyidna Hibatullah did. "wa lam yakun qabla dhalika tara fi qalbi wa janani" (And before that, it had not occurred in my heart or my soul). And before this, these matters had not come to my heart and my soul. "wa hiya nuqtah min bahri 'ulumihi wa hibatihi" (And it is a drop from the ocean of his knowledges and his gifts). And this is a drop from the ocean of his knowledge and his gifts. And "wa tuhfatun min tuhafihi" (and a gift from his gifts). And it is a gift from his gifts. "wa sadaqa min sadaqatihi" (and a charity from his charities). And it is a charity from his charities that he has bestowed upon me. "wa qad saqatha ayyuha al-...ilayka hadiyah mubaradah bi-ghayri ta'abin 'alayka" (and it has been driven to you, O... a cooled gift, without any toil for you). And these things have reached you, O brother, as a gift that is very cooling—that is, one that gives peace—without toil. Meaning, you have not made any effort for this, and this thing has reached you. "wa mathaluha la yahsul illa bi'l-ibtila" (and its like is not attained except through trial). And these things... they are not attained except that one is put through various trials and "wa'l-hijr wa'l-hijrat" (and separation and emigrations)... and emigrations have to be made, and "wa'l-firaq li'l-ahl wa'l-awtan" (and separation from family and homelands)... and one has to leave one's family and one's cities and one's homelands, only then are these things attained. And for you, they have been attained while sitting here. "fa-ahmad mawlaka fi ghuduwwika wa masaka" (So praise your Lord in your morning and your evening). So you should give thanks and praise to your Mawla in the morning and evening.

"al-su'al al-thalith" (the third question). The third question. "qad 'alimtu mimma jawwaba Zain al-'Abidin 'ala Umm al-Nada min qabli... 'umr al-dunya" (I have known from what Zain al-'Abidin answered Umm al-Nada from before... the age of the world). And I have already given the answer which Mawlana Zain al-'Abidin gave to Umm al-Nada. Umm al-Nada was a woman who was a very magnificent wife, and she was from the Hudud al-Da'wat, and she was a very 'alimah (learned) woman. She came to Imam Zain al-'Abidin 'alayhi al-salam and said, "Mawlana, please tell me how much time has passed on the world? And how much time is remaining?" So he said, "I will tell you how much time has passed, but I will not tell you how much time is remaining. You do not have the istihqaq (right/merit) for it." This is what he said. And he said that one mawr... and this... one mawr has passed, and we are sitting in this kawr, this dawr, of the second mawr. He had told her this.

"wa qad qala Sayyidna al-Qadi Sarim al-Din qaddas Allahu nafsahu wa razaqna shafa'atahu" (And Sayyidna al-Qadi Sarim al-Din—may Allah sanctify his soul and grant us his intercession—has said). And Sayyidna al-Qadi Sarim al-Din—that is, Sayyidna Ibrahim bin Muhammad Faad, who is your grandfather—has said that... may Allah sanctify you and grant you the provision of his intercession, "bi-ridaka 'anna" (with your pleasure for us)... and may he be pleased with you, and may we receive the provision of his intimacy, "anna al-rukn min fudulat Amir al-Mu'minin al-qadimah fi al-akwar al-ula" (that the Corner is from the ancient remnants of the Commander of the Faithful in the first cycles). That the Rukn (Corner)... Rukn al-Asad... meaning, Baytullah has four arkan (corners), and among them, the corner in which the Hajar al-Aswad is located is al-Rukn al-As'ad (the Most Fortunate Corner). Alif, Seen, 'Ayn, Daal. Meaning, the most blessed one. So, what is that Rukn al-Asad? It is that the Rukn al-Asad is made from the fudulat (remnants) of Amir al-Mu'minin who have passed in ancient times. The fudulat of Amir al-Mu'minin, in the akwar (cycles), in the first akwar. And this has been made apparent, "fi waraqatayni bi-khatti Sayyidi Safi al-Din Ahmad bin Isma'il" (in two pages in the handwriting of my master Safi al-Din Ahmad bin Isma'il). Ahmad bin Isma'il was among the Hudud of that time, so he had written all these things in two pages at that time. "fi awwal al-jussah al-mudhamah" (in the first major corporeal form). That the first jussah (corporeal form)... the first jussah that occurred of the kawr, so from there the things that came, and in that akwar, the raj'at (return) of Amir al-Mu'minin kept happening, they kept being born, then passing away, so in this way, through the repetition of their fudulat, that Rukn al-Asad was formed. He said that in it, in the Rukn al-Asad, what things have come? The fudulat of Amir al-Mu'minin have come. "wa fi ayyi kawr zahara amruhu" (And in which cycle did his affair appear?). And in which kawr did your affair manifest? "wa kayfa kana zuhuruhu" (And how was its appearance?). And in what manner was its appearance? "wa hal yaqi'u 'alayhi al-subhaniyyah" (And does the term 'Subhaniyyah' apply to him?). Can the term 'Subhaniyyah' be applied to you? Meaning, when we say "Subhan," "Subhan Allah" (Glory to Allah), we say it, don't we? So, the "Subhan Allah" that we say, is it permissible regarding Amir al-Mu'minin that he too be called "Subhan Allah"? That the word "Subhan" be used for him? "wa kam min hadha ... 'umr al-dunya" (And how much of this... the age of the world). And...
[Side discussion begins]
[Questioner:] The fudulat of Amir al-Mu'minin...
[Speaker:] ...from the repetition...
[Questioner:] Amir al-Mu'minin and the A'immah, they are all ri'yat. From the perspective of the purity of their din (religion), fudulat don't even get created there.
[Speaker:] The object of fudulat... it's a good question you've asked. So, by fudulat it is not meant what the fudulah (remnant/excretion) of a Mumin (believer) is. They all become ri'yat and depart. Within three days, they are confined to the grave for only three days, and the rest become flowing. They become ri'yat. And what is meant by fudulat? They are their remaining parts. Meaning... just as it has been said in a previous lesson that their... the ri'yat that are stored, where are they? In the Baytullah. And they are divided into five parts. Out of that, one part goes to the Hudud al-Da'wat, with which they make correct decisions, and they are saved from evils, and their standard in taqwa (piety) becomes high. All these things... that one-fifth part of their... those ri'yat etc., which is also called fudulat in one sense. And then it is returned too... when he passes away, those things return to the Baytullah. Yes. So, here by fudulat it is meant their ri'yat which make progress, and those progressed ri'yat which, after making progress, where do they come? They come to the Baytullah.
[Questioner:] But this has taken a material form.
[Speaker:] Yes.
[Questioner:] It has taken a material form. So, for a ri'yat to come into a material form...
[Speaker:] No... it's not in a material form...
[Questioner:] I mean, the Rukn al-Asad has been formed, a stone has been formed, so that has become material, hasn't it?
[Speaker:] No, the state of the Rukn al-Asad itself is lofty. It is not material. I mean... in the stone... the blessings that are in the stone, it is pointing towards that.
[Questioner:] As it is mentioned with us, that the blessed stones, which are 'aqiq (carnelian) and yaqut (ruby), they are all fudulat of the Du'at Kiram. That is very understandable. But the fudulat of Mawla Ali and the A'immah Kiram are all...
[Speaker:] No, fudulat...
[Questioner:] ...ri'yat...
[Speaker:] ...fudulat are not even formed.
[Questioner:] Yes.
[Speaker:] In one sense they are called fudulat. The remaining things that are left from their bodies, they are called fudulat. Sometimes ri'yat are also called fudulat. And those fudulat that progress in the moon and go to Jupiter, and one part of them becomes... they descend and form the body of the coming Imam. Yes. And some part of it comes to the Baytullah, and this, in the Baytullah, one-fifth of it is received by the Hudud al-Da'wat. And it also happens that they... the fudulat of Amir al-Mu'minin which have progressed and are in a purified state, they come and... the Baytullah's... the... the Baytullah's Rukn al-Asad...
[Audio interference]
[Speaker:] The voice from Baytullah's Rukn al-Asad... Yes, the voice is coming, the voice... Husnain Sahab, is the voice coming?
[Husnain Sahab:] Yes. Yes, it's coming. Assalamu 'alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh.
[Audio interference]
[Speaker:] Yes? No, your voice is not clear.
[Audio interference]
When I was reading this, I also had a doubt about why the word fudulat was used. So by fudulat, it is meant ri'yat.
[Side discussion ends]

"wa qad tabaddala al-mashriq maghriban wa'l-shimal junuban" (And the east has changed into the west, and the north into the south). And the east becomes the west, and the north becomes the south. So, "tafaddalu bi'l-jawab al-shafi" (so kindly grant the healing answer). So please do us the favor of giving such an answer that will be sufficient for me. "tawwala Allahu subhanahu bi-a'marikum" (May Allah, glory be to Him, lengthen your lives). May Allah increase your lifespans. "al-jawab 'ala dhalika al-su'al, naqulu bi-'awn Allah al-Kabir al-Muta'al" (The answer to that question: we say with the help of Allah, the Great, the Most High). The answer to that question, we say, with the help of Allah, the Great, the Most High, "wa minnat Wali al-'Asr wa'l-Zaman" (and the grace of the Master of the Age and the Time), and with the grace of our Wali al-'Asr wa'l-Zaman, "'alayhi salawat al-Rahim al-Rahman" (upon him be the blessings of the Merciful, the Compassionate), and with the support of my Mawla al-A'lam and his brilliant and magnificent secret, and with the supports of Mawla al-A'lam, that is, the supports of Hibatullah Sahab, that, and that secret of yours which is so brilliant and magnificent, "anna ja'a ... awrada Sayyidna Sarim al-Din" (that it has come... Sayyidna Sarim al-Din has presented)... and this matter has come, and it has been related by Sayyidna Sarim, that is Sayyidna Hibatullah, that... in 'Illiyyin (the highest heaven), may Allah sanctify him in 'Illiyyin, "bi-anna al-Hajar al-Aswad min kathif Amir al-Mu'minin al-muwajjad" (that the Black Stone is from the dense substance of the present Commander of the Faithful). That the Hajar al-Aswad, it is from the kathif (dense substance) of Amir al-Mu'minin al-muwajjad (the one who is made present). By kathif, it is meant those ri'yat, the ri'yat which are purified, which find a place in various noble parts. A noble place. So one noble place is that it becomes the very body of the Imam, meaning it becomes the body of the Imam who is to come. And throughout life, the food that the present Imam consumes, and the food that the future child consumes, all of that is ri'yat. And because the Mu'minin are connected to those Imams and profess their walayat (allegiance), they receive a share of that food. Yes. Just as in Surah Furqan it says that, "wa-j'alna li'l-muttaqin" (And make us for the righteous)... in the verses of 'ibad al-Rahman (servants of the Merciful), it says, "wa-j'alna li'l-muttaqin imama" (And make us an Imam for the righteous). So make us an Imam for the righteous. So a person was circumambulating the Baytullah while reciting this verse, because in the verses for tawaf (circumambulation), you will see that this verse also comes. The verse of tawaf. So, "wa-j'alna li'l-muttaqin imama" (And make us an Imam for the righteous). Make us the Imam of the righteous. So he [the Imam] said that, "You have asked Allah for an improper thing. You have asked for something far beyond your station," he said. Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq or Mawlana Ali Zain al-'Abidin said this to that person, that "You have asked for something far greater than your status. You cannot become an Imam. You cannot become the Imam of the righteous; you do not have that status." Even though it is a Quranic verse. But when you make du'a (supplication), you should say in your du'a, "wa-j'alna min al-muttaqin" (And make us from among the righteous). That "Make me from among the righteous."

"fa-dhalika huwa al-haqq alladhi la shakka ya'tarihi" (So that is the truth which no doubt befalls). And that is the truth, such that no doubt can befall it. "wa'l-sirr al-khafi alladhi la maryata fihi" (And the hidden secret in which there is no doubt). And it is a hidden secret that there is no doubt in it. "wa amma qawluka, wa fi ayyi kawr zahara sallallahu 'alayhi wa 'alihi al-ghur" (As for your statement, 'And in which cycle did he—peace be upon him and his luminous family—appear?'). And your asking that in which kawr did Ali 'alayhi al-salam and his family appear, "faqad qala al-Nabi 'alayhi al-salam, ana ibn al-karrat wa mumtahin al-awqat" (The Prophet, peace be upon him, has said, 'I am the son of the recurring cycles and the one tried by the times'). So, the Nabi 'alayhi al-salam has said that, "I am ibn al-karrat." Meaning, we have been born in various recurring cycles. "ana ibn al-karrat wa mumtahin al-awqat." And we have been tested in various times. As in one narration, he said that, "Allah tested me seven times before risalat (prophethood). Before making me a rasul (messenger), He tested me seven times. And after making me a rasul, He tested me seven times." This is what Amir al-Mu'minin says. He says that, "Rasulullah, before making me his wasi (successor), tested me seven times. And then after making me his wasi, he tested me seven times." And all those fourteen... he recited the list of tests in a single gathering. "Did this not happen?" So the entire gathering testified, "Yes, you are speaking the truth. Yes, it happened just so, it happened just so." So you have passed through fourteen tests. So, the Awliya Allah (friends of Allah), they all pass through tests. Yes.

"faqad su'ila Mawlana al-Sadiq haythu qala" (And Mawlana al-Sadiq was asked, whereupon he said)... And this is what it is, that the test is a system of the da'wat (mission). That until one is made to pass through a test, one is not established in a rank. Just as... Sayyidna Yusuf bin Sulayman, who is the very first Dai in Hindustan, the grandfather of Sayyidna Sulayman Sahab... Sayyidna Yusuf bin Sulayman, who has a great status and magnificence... so, he... the last Dai of the Bani Anf, who was Sayyidna Dai Muhammad Husayn... so, he... after that, there were no more dais of Bani Anf. Yes. So Sayyidna Muhammad Husayn put him through a very severe test. And he lived in a village far away and would come early in the morning to study with Sayyidna Sahab. So one day he came, and the hajib (chamberlain), who was your guard, the guard of Sayyidna Muhammad bin Husayn... Muhammad bin Husayn... so he said that Sayyidna Sahab has said to go back. So he went back. In this way, for forty days, you kept coming continuously at your usual time. And after that... you were sent back again. He said, "The Dai does not wish to see your face." On the fortieth day, you... the hajib said to you, "Go away." So the Dai at that time, from his veranda, said, "Let Yusuf come to me." And you came, and he embraced you. And this was, in a way, a test. Yes. So, in this way, you were made to pass through various tests.

Once Sayyidna Husayn bin Isma'il was saying that there were two times in the da'wat when the Hindustani muhajirin (emigrants) were more numerous than the muhajirin of Yemen and Najran. The Hindustani muhajirin. There were two such times. So when was one? At the time of Sayyidna Yusuf bin Sulayman. The Hindustani muhajirin were more numerous than the muhajirin of Yemen and Najran. And the second time was at the time of Sayyidna Hibatullah Sahab. At the time of Sayyidna Hibatullah Sahab. So, the Hindustani muhajirin were more numerous.

"wa qad su'ila Mawlana al-Sadiq haythu qala, kunna fi'l-adwar al-madiyyah wa'l-huqub al-khaliyah" (And Mawlana al-Sadiq was asked, whereupon he said, 'We were in the past cycles and the bygone eras'). In response to the question, you gave this answer, that "We were in the past cycles." The cycles that have passed, we were present in them, "wa'l-huqub al-khaliyah." And the cycles that have passed, we were present in them. "wa qala lahu al-sa'il, ya Mawlai, kuntum bi-ashkhasiukum am bi-a'yanikum" (And the questioner said to him, 'O my Master, were you there in your persons or in your representatives?'). As for Mawlana Aristotle... what did he say about him? That "Kana Aba Muhammad Aristatalis minna Ahl al-Bayt" (Aba Muhammad Aristotle was from us, the Ahl al-Bayt). He even told his kunyah (patronymic), Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq did. That Aristotle, Aristatalis, whose title was Aba Muhammad, he was from us, the Ahl al-Bayt. Yes. Just as he said for Salman al-Farsi, that "Salman minna Ahl al-Bayt, yusalla wa yusallam 'alayhi" (Salman is from us, the Ahl al-Bayt; blessings and peace should be sent upon him), "just as you send blessings and peace upon us." So, the state of Janab Salman is very lofty, because he is the only person in the entire da'wat, in the entire Dawr al-Sitr, who became the Bab al-Abwab (Gate of Gates) for both the Nabi and the Wasi. Meaning, he became the Bab al-Abwab for the Prophet, the Master of the Universe, Salman al-Farsi did. Yes. Janab Khadijah also became your Bab al-Abwab, but then later you also became one, Salman al-Farsi 'alayhi al-salam did. And he also became the Bab al-Abwab of Janab Ali 'alayhi al-salam, Salman did.

"fa-qala lahu al-sa'il, ya Mawlai, kuntum bi-ashkhasiukum am bi-a'yanikum" (So the questioner said to him, 'O my Master, were you there in your persons or in your representatives?'). Meaning, were you there in your persons or with your ashkhass (persons)? Meaning, with your real self or with your hijabs (veils)? "fa-qala lahu bal bi-ashkhasiina wa a'yanina" (So he said to him, 'Rather, in our persons and our representatives'). Rather, we were with our real selves and we were with our hijabs. "wa amma al-Hajar al-Aswad wa'l-Rukn al-As'ad fa-qad yakun wallahu a'lam anna qawl Sayyidna Sarim al-Din innahu ittasala bihi shay'un latif mimma dakhkhiratuhu al-'inayat al-ilahiyyah min hujub Amir al-Mu'minin al-mukanna 'anhu bi'l-'ayn al-'azimah al-nuraniyyah" (As for the Black Stone and the Most Fortunate Corner, it may be—and Allah knows best—that the statement of Sayyidna Sarim al-Din is that a subtle substance connected with it from what the divine providence stored from the veils of the Commander of the Faithful, who is alluded to as the Great, Luminous 'Ayn). And it is that—and Allah knows best—the statement of Sayyidna Sarim, Sayyidna Ibrahim, is that a subtle substance from what was stored by the divine providence—meaning 'Ashir, or the jussah-e-ibtidaiyyah of 'Ashir—from that he stored it from the hijabs of Amir al-Mu'minin, who is called the 'Ayn al-'Azimah (the Great 'Ayn), al-nuraniyyah (the luminous one), was connected to you, to his real self. "wa amma qawluka, wa hal yaqi'u 'alayhi al-subhaniyyah" (As for your statement, 'And does the term 'Subhaniyyah' apply to him?'). And your saying that upon Amir al-Mu'minin, can the word "Subhaniyyah" be applied? "faqad sabbahatuhu al-mala'ikah al-qudsaniyyah" (For the holy angels have glorified him). So know this matter, that the holy angels have glorified him. Meaning, they have said "Subhan." So they have glorified him, the holy angels have, "haythu tashawwaqat ila tasawwur shakhsihi al-gharr" (when they yearned for the perception of his brilliant person). That they had yearned, the angels did, to perceive your... the brilliant person, to see him. "fa-awjada Allah" (So Allah brought into existence)... I mean, there... in the spiritual world, in the spiritual realm, to see you. To have the didar (vision) of you, of Amir al-Mu'minin. I mean, the corporeal and on earth, Amir al-Mu'minin is present, but to have his didar there, in the spiritual world, and in the heavens. So, for that, they had asked Allah. "fa-awjada Allah ta'ala subhanahu fi'l-samawati mithaluhu" (So Allah the Exalted, glory be to Him, brought into existence his likeness in the heavens). So Allah created a likeness of you in the heavens. "fa-kanat tasbihuhu wa taqdisuhu laylan wa naharan 'ashiyyatan wa abkara" (So they glorified and sanctified him night and day, evening and morning). Thus, the angels glorified and sanctified you morning and evening, and night and day. "fa-kana hadha mithal 'azim" (And this was a great example). And this is a great example. "fa-kayfa bi-khalifat al-'Ashir al-Hakim" (So how is it with the Caliph of the 'Ashir, the Wise?). Just as the Quranic verse says that, "fi'l-sama'i ilahun wa fi'l-ardi ilah" (In the heaven is a god, and on the earth is a god). So he is pointing towards this state of Amir al-Mu'minin. That in heaven there is a god, meaning, in heaven there is an Ali and his likeness, and on earth there is an Ali and his likeness is in heaven. Yes.

"fa-kayfa bi-khalifat al-'Ashir al-Hakim wa ma-ndimamuhu fi dimn al-Qa'im al-hashir al-nashir" (So how is it with the Caliph of the 'Ashir, the Wise, and his inclusion within the Qa'im, the Gatherer, the Resurrector?). That your inclusion took place with the Qa'im. You became the Bab al-Abwab for the Qa'im. Meaning, you... the A'immah who were before you, from Janab Hunayn to Amir al-Mu'minin, the A'immah... Mawlana Abu Talib... no, Abu Talib is not included in this. Mawlana... the thalathah sufarah (the three emissaries)... that is Mawlana 'Abd al-Muttalib, Mawlana 'Abdullah, and Mawlana Abu Talib. Their inclusion did not happen with Mawlana Amir al-Mu'minin. Only these three... the inclusion of only these three did not happen with you. Rather, they remained in the barzakh (intermediate state) of the Janab-e-Qa'im. And the Qa'im directly absorbed them. Not through Amir al-Mu'minin. Yes. They have a very high status. So... Janab Hashim... yes, up to Janab Hashim, you... they... so Amir al-Mu'minin gathered the hayakil (structures) of the sufarah-e-nayyirah (luminous emissaries). And then after that, he gathered the hayakil from Janab Hasan to Abul-Qa'im. So they became the Bab al-Abwab of Qa'im 'alayhi al-salam. And it has never happened that an Imam has gathered the A'immah who came after him. But this is among the extraordinary miracles of Amir al-Mu'minin, that you gathered the hayakil of the Imams who came later as well. Yes. And it is that your... the surah... your nafs-e-hissiyah (sensory soul) was so powerful and spiritual that you... it was greater than the hayakil of others. Because who can gather a haykal? Unless their nafs-e-hissiyah is greater than it.

So, your hashr (gathering) was with the Qa'im. So, meaning, the point is that you will become the caliph of the 'Ashir, the Mudabbir (the 'Ashir, the director). Meaning by 'Ashir, it's not that 'Ashir, but the jussah (body) of this kawr, its yawman ma (one day)... it's not like you'll become the caliph right away. Yawman ma, becoming and becoming, in the line that has been formed, you will become the khalifah (caliph) in it. The caliph of the 'Ashir. And "wa su'uduhu ila rutbat al-'Ashir" (And his ascent to the rank of the 'Ashir). And your ascent will be... as the 'Ashir, you will be the jussah-e-ibtidaiyyah in which you will come. Yawman ma.

"sabbahathu al-mala'ikah al-ruhaniyyah bi-a'la min dhalika al-shan" (The spiritual angels glorified him with a station higher than that). And the spiritual angels glorified you with a station higher than the station you had before. Meaning, the station you had in various recurring cycles, the station that was higher than that, which you had in the seventh dawr (period), in the seventh zuhur (manifestation)... I mean, this manifestation of yours was the seventh manifestation. In the Dawr al-Sitr, when you came, it was your seventh manifestation, which was higher than the previous manifestations. Yes. In which you performed those deeds, the extraordinary miracles that you performed, it was because it was your seventh manifestation. So the angels glorified you, a glorification that was higher than the previous manifestations, "li-man fatana al-ma'ani al-rabbaniyyah" (for one who comprehends the Lordly meanings). The one who reflects on the Lordly meanings. "wa amma qawluka kam hatta tabaddala al-mashriq maghriban wa'l-shimal junuban" (As for your statement, 'How long until the east has changed into the west, and the north into the south?'). And when will it be that the east becomes the west and the north becomes the south? "fa-yakunu dhalika 'inda tarakhi al-rubatat" (So that will be at the loosening of the ties). And this will happen at the tarakhi al-rubatat (loosening of the ties), meaning at the end of the kawr. At the end of the kawr, this will happen. "wa takunu al-tabdilat wa'l-istihalat" (And the changes and transformations will occur). And there will be very big changes, and major events will happen, such that things will change. "wa amma 'iddat dhalika fa-qad dhakarahu Sayyidna Humam" (As for the period of that, Sayyidna Humam has mentioned it). And when will be the duration of that? Sayyidna Humam al-Din has mentioned it... Sayyidna Humamuddin... Sayyidna Sulayman has mentioned it... and... so, the one who is looking, with the permission of the Wali al-Amr... so, the matters that Sayyidna Humam, Sayyidna Sulayman bin Hasan, has said, one should look at them. "wa fi aqwal dhil-jaddayn ma yujli al-sada wa'l-rayn" (And in the sayings of Dhul-Jaddayn is that which clears the rust and the stain). And in the sayings of Dhul-Jaddayn—meaning Husayn bin Ahmad. Sayyidna Husayn bin Ahmad is Dhul-Jaddayn. He has a great status. He wrote the tafsir (exegesis) of the Quran in 70 days and nights. Yes. And he wrote it on the command of Sayyidna Ali Sahab. Sayyidna Ali Sahab commanded him, because you were his sister's son, right? You were the son of Sayyidna Ali Sahab's sister. So he commanded you; you were 33 years old at that time when he gave the command. So, and you yourself, Sayyidna Husayn bin Ahmad, performed the Hajj of Sayyidna Ja'far. Meaning, Sayyidna Ja'far did not perform Hajj. Though Sayyidna Ja'far has a great status, he is the 28th Dai, and among the shumukh du'at (lofty dais), he is the first. But you did not get the opportunity to perform Hajj. Once you did set out for Hajj, but there were some issues due to which you had to turn back. So... so then Sayyidna Ali Sahab commanded you, "You perform the Hajj of Sayyidna Sahab as a qada' (make-up) and complete it." So you had completed the Hajj of Sayyidna Ja'far. And it is that he commanded, "Husayn, you write the tafsir of the Quran." So then you wrote it in 70 days and nights, while you also traveled during those 70 days and nights. You also traveled. And in the state of travel too, you... today... and that... when you completed it, a very fast writer from Yemen, a katib (scribe), he took eight months to write it. He took eight months to write it. It's in three volumes, big volumes. And this is a state, a magnificent state that you achieved, Sayyidna Husayn bin Ahmad. And he is not a munfarid (solitary) dai. But he is a dai... despite not being a munfarid dai, he has a great status. And it is that... his... the du'at take tawassul (intercession) from him, and Sayyidna Usama says... Sayyidna Isma'il bin Hibatullah Sahab himself has said "Sayyidna Usama" in several places inside the Kawakeb al-Durriyah, such a great and magnificent book. So, you... your books too are very splendid books. So, he is saying the same thing, that in the sayings of your Dhul-Jaddayn, which remove the rust that has settled on hearts, from them you should take help from the sayings.

"al-su'al al-rabi' 'an al-bata'ih allati tahta al-Ka'bah, kam hiya" (The fourth question, concerning the lowlands that are beneath the Ka'bah, how many are they?). And the fourth question is regarding the bata'ih (lowlands), that beneath the Ka'bah... the bata'ih that are beneath the Ka'bah, how many are they? "wa min ayna abwabuhum" (And from where are their gates?). And which are their doors? "wa ma tasir wa yasiru ilayha" (And what travels and goes towards it?). And what things go up to it? "wa ma yadharu minha" (And what appears from it?). And what things manifest from it, from these bata'ih? "wa Bir Dhat al-'Alam alladhi qala al-shakhs al-'azim" (And the Well of Dhat al-'Alam about which the great person spoke). And Bir Dhat al-'Alam, which was in the battle of Bani Mustaliq, the jihad that was there, when you were returning from it, Rasulullah, salawatullahi 'alayhi, you reached a place, and the people there said, "We have this well in which there are shayatin (devils), and they trouble us a lot, and all the people are in this state of distress." So you... commanded your army... because you were returning with the army. So you commanded the army, "Who is there who will go and fight them?" So two young men stood up. So you said, "I give the guarantee of jannah (paradise) for them," the Rasul said. That whoever fights with them, I give them the guarantee of jannah, that he... so two young men stood up, and but they fought and passed away. Yes, they did. So you said to Ali, "Qum ya Ali" (Stand, O Ali). "Ali, you stand, and you fight them." Then Janab Ali fought them in Dhat Bir al-'Alam. And when you came out, blood was flowing from your sword. Yes. So Janab Rasulullah asks, "O Ali, how did you fight them?" "How did you fight them?" So you said, "I fought with my sword, and I... on them... I fought by blowing the verses of the Quran on them." Meaning, I killed them. That is, the verses of the Quran, how much effect they must have, that you said, "I killed them by reciting the verses of the Quran and blowing on them." And this, I fought with the sword. And he also mentioned a third method, that "This is how I fought."
[Phone rings]
[Speaker on phone:] Hello. Yes, I'm doing the ring. Hello. Yes. I'll call you.
[Resumes lecture]

So this Bir Dhat al-'Alam, this is the name of a well. And here you fought, Amir al-Mu'minin did. And it was asked in some book, from some dai, so the dai answered that in Bir Dhat al-'Alam, the jinn that Amir al-Mu'minin fought, were all the jinn finished? So the dai said, "No, they remain. They remain, but the coming Qa'im will bring them to an end." Yes. Just as the matter of 'adhab (punishment) and thawab (reward)... the matter of giving 'adhab, meaning giving 'adhab to the enemies of the din... the A'immah cannot decide that matter. They leave it to the Qa'im. He is the Hashir and Nashir (Gatherer and Resurrector), the Qa'im is. So all the Imams are, so this giving 'adhab and giving thawab, whom to send to jannah, whom to send to hell, they leave the decision for that partially to Amir al-Mu'minin, that he is the Qasim al-Nar wa'l-Jannah (Distributor of the Fire and the Garden), or to the Qa'im, who will make the final decision. Yes. And he will cast them into Sakhr, the azdad (opposites), and whatever decision he makes, he will make it. Yes. To the extent that, you can gauge from our 'ulum (knowledge), that when the Qa'im will make his zuhur (appearance), and it will be the occasion of Hajj, when he makes his zuhur, and then he will say to the Mu'minin, "You... on the yawm al-nahr (day of sacrifice), that is, the day of 'Id, you kill the azdad." So the Mu'minin will kill the azdad. Yes. And this matter will continue for three days. Yes. And to the extent that, after one day or the second day, such a stench will spread in the valley of Mina that the Mu'minin will find it difficult to breathe. So then they will plead to the Qa'im, that "We cannot live in this state, whereas we have to stay in the valley of Mina until the 13th." So the Imam will command the wind, and those winds will... winds will blow, and the manafidh (outlets) of Sakhr... Sakhr has four manafidh. From them, those... those things will be taken away towards Sakhr. Yes. Sayyidna Ali Sahab has also listed the names of those four manafidh. In one of his books. Yes.
[Questioner:] Where is this well?
[Speaker:] No, I haven't gauged where it is.
And from the perspective of the Qa'im-e-Juzwi (partial Qa'im), the miracles you have... of Amir al-Mu'minin... among them, probably this Bir Dhat al-'Alam is also there.

"Inni dhahabtu ila tahti mizab al-Ka'bah fi qissat qital al-jinn" (I went under the water-spout of the Ka'bah in the story of the battle with the jinn). The story of qital al-jinn, you have said, Amir al-Mu'minin has, that "I went under the mizab (water-spout) of the Ka'bah." In it... I don't remember the story... that story. He went under the mizab of the Ka'bah, and "wa'l-mawaqif al-arba'" (and the four stations). And the mawaqif are four. "wa min ayna manafidh al-bata'ih" (And from where are the outlets of the lowlands?). And from where are the manafidh of the bata'ih, the windows? They are from where? "wa mannu bi'l-jawab fa-antum ahl al-sawab" (So grant the favor of an answer, for you are the people of correctness). So give the answer, you, and do us the favor, because you are the people of correctness. "al-jawab 'ala dhalika al-su'al, naqulu bi-'awn Allah al-Kabir al-Muta'al" (The answer to that question: we say with the help of Allah, the Great, the Most High). The answer to your question, we say, with the help of Allah, the Great, the Most High, and with the grace of the Wali al-'Asr wa'l-Zaman, and the grace of the Wali al-'Asr wa'l-Zaman, 'alayhi salawat al-Rahim al-Rahman (upon him be the blessings of the Merciful, the Compassionate). May the blessings of the Merciful, the Compassionate be upon you. "wa ta'yid Mawlai al-A'lam wa sirrihi al-ba' wa'l-mu'azzam" (And with the support of my Master, the Most Learned, and his brilliant and magnificent secret). And with the support of Sayyidna Hibatullah Sahab, and your magnificent and luminous secret, "anna al-bata'ih allati hawla al-qalb al-gharr hiya arba'" (that the lowlands which are around the brilliant heart are four). That the bata'ih which are around the qalb (heart), the luminous qalb, they are four bata'ih. "kama sabaqa min al-qawl" (as has been mentioned in the previous statement). As has been stated before. "li-man haqqaqa al-nazar" (for one who has verified the observation). "wa qawluka innaha tahta al-bayt al-munir fa-laysa dhalika kadhalik bal hawlahu" (And your statement that it is beneath the luminous House, it is not so, rather it is around it). And your saying that it is beneath the Bayt al-Munir (Luminous House), it is not so; rather, it is around it, on its peripheries. "'ala amrin jalilin khatir" (upon a great and momentous affair). Yes. The great and momentous affair, in that it is on its peripheries, the bata'ih are, not beneath it. "wa amma qawluka min ayna abwabuhum wa majariha" (As for your statement, 'From where are their gates and their channels?'). And your asking that which are its doors and from where are its channels for flowing... "wa amma ma yas'adu minha wa yasiru ilayha" (As for what ascends from it and what goes towards it). And things ascend and descend towards it. "fa-'alam anna tahta al-qalb ma'un latif" (So know that beneath the heart is a subtle water). And know that beneath the qalb there is a subtle water, "wa fi wasatihi" (and in its center)... and in its center too there is subtle water. "wa minhu yanba'u ila tahti tilka al-bata'ih" (And from it gushes forth to beneath those lowlands). And from it, from those waters, things ascend towards the bata'ih, "bi-majari" (through channels). And there are channels there which open, "wa manafidh" (and outlets)... and windows are there, "'ala amrin sharif" (upon a noble affair). "wa hawla hadhihi al-bata'ih ahwiyah" (And around these lowlands are atmospheres). And around these bata'ih, which are four, there are atmospheres. "al-sharifah al-shaffafah al-munirah" (The noble, transparent, luminous ones). That are transparent and luminous. "wa kadhalika hawla hadhihi al-bata'ih ma'un latif" (And likewise, around these lowlands is a subtle water). And in the same way, around the bata'ih there is also water which is a very subtle water. "wa la yazal yas'adu minha bukhar sharif" (And a noble vapor does not cease to ascend from it). And vapors which are noble always keep ascending. From these bata'ih. "wa huwa al-mizaj" (And it is the temperament). And this is also called the mizaj (temperament). "alladhi dhakarahu Sayyidna Hamid al-Din, alladhi takawwanat minhu nufus al-nuqa wa'l-a'immah al-mayamin" (which Sayyidna Hamid al-Din mentioned, from which were formed the souls of the pure ones and the blessed Imams). And this mizaj, which is rising from the subtle water, and becoming vapor, and it is called mizaj. So Sayyidna Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani has mentioned this, that from it, from this mizaj, from these vapors, the nufus (souls) of the nuqa (pure ones) and the A'immah al-Mayamin (blessed Imams) are formed.

"wa amma qawluka Bir Dhat al-'Alam" (As for your statement, 'the Well of Dhat al-'Alam'). And your asking about Bir Dhat al-'Alam, "wa qatluhu Amir al-Mu'minin al-mu'azzam al-jinn" (and the killing of the jinn by the magnificent Commander of the Faithful). And the killing of the jinn by Amir al-Mu'minin, "alladhina zaharu lamma da'ahum sallallahu 'alayhi fa-wallaw wa ankaru" (who appeared when he—peace be upon him—called them, but they turned away and denied). When they appeared... when you, Amir al-Mu'minin, gave them da'wat (invitation), but they denied it and turned their backs and went away. "fa-dhalika huwa al-qawl al-wadih al-sarih" (So that is the clear, explicit statement). So this matter is true and clear and explicit, that it happened so, that Amir al-Mu'minin had given da'wat to these jinn, and these jinn had denied it, whereas in Surah Jinn it says that the jinn accepted faith in you. Those were other jinn. The jinn accepted faith in you, and its states have been described in Surah Jinn.

"wa'l-hadith al-marwi al-sahih" (And the authentic, transmitted hadith). And the hadith which is authentic, "wa qatala minhum man zahara fi suwar al-haywaniyyah" (And he killed from among them those who appeared in animal forms). That those who appeared in suwar-e-haywaniyyah (animal forms), meaning in corporeal forms, you killed them. "wa akhmada man tajarrada minhum fi surat al-zulmaniyyah" (And he extinguished those among them who were divested in the form of darkness). But those who were in the zulmani (dark) form, not in the haywani (animal) form, in the zulmani form, who were mujarrad (abstract/divested) among them, so you destroyed them and rendered them motionless. You rendered them motionless. "bi'l-hujaj al-wadihah" (with the clear proofs). With your clear hujaj (proofs) and "wa'l-barahin al-laihah" (and the evident demonstrations). I mean, you also established hujaj on those zulmani forms. "wa aslama minhum kathir" (And many among them submitted/became Muslim). And from them, many also accepted faith, they became Muslims. "wa la yunabbi'uka mithlu khabir" (And none can inform you like one who is well-acquainted). And the news I am giving, no one else will say these things. "wa amma al-mawaqit fa-fiha asrar batinah wa zawahir kaminah" (As for the miqats, in them are hidden secrets and latent manifestations). The miqat (appointed places for starting ihram), in them are hidden secrets and latent manifestations. Yes.

And how many miqats are there? Five. And the most excellent miqat is zul-halifa. Which is also called Bir Ali. Bir Ali is also called, zul-halifa is there. It's also called Masjid al-Shajarah. Yes. That is the highest miqat, and the Hajj that Rasul 'alayhi al-salam performed—he performed only one Hajj in the 10th year of Hijri—so he started his Hajj from this miqat. Yes. And there are great events related to it too. Janab Rasulullah had taken Janab 'A'ishah with him, and Janab 'A'ishah had her period. So at that time you lamented a lot, and Rasulullah said, "When Allah has made you weak and has made you deficient, then you should bear it." You commanded her sternly. Yes. And then after that he moved forward, and many incidents occurred with the companions of the Rasul at the miqat. Yes.

And at the miqat, all those things... our ri'yat and fudulat, the miqat is their passage. To the extent that it is said that if a person does not enter ihram at the miqat and goes ahead, he should turn back, return to the miqat, and make the 'aqd-e-niyyat (intention) at the miqat. That is the importance of the miqat. That Hajj or 'Umrah cannot happen without the miqat. The miqat becomes the bab (gate) for it. For 'Umrah or for Hajj. Yes. And the sixth miqat is a temporary miqat. That is tan'im. It is actually Masjid Ali. Tan'im is Masjid Ali. So, it has become very grand now. When we went for the first time, it was a very small masjid. Anyway, so that is a temporary miqat, meaning from that miqat, we... if a person arrives on the 8th. He arrives on the 8th of Dhu al-Hijjah. Now where will he go to the miqat in Sail, where will he go? And the other miqats which are far away, he doesn't have that much time. So he, where? At tan'im, he can make his niyyat (intention). And he can join in. And he doesn't even have that much time, so he should go straight to 'Arafat. Because reaching 'Arafat and the feet being in 'Arafat is what completes his Hajj. If a person does not reach 'Arafat, his Hajj is incomplete, his Hajj is not done. And 'Arafat is attributed to Rasulullah. We go to three places, right? One is Mina, our main station. Mina. Mina is for Amir al-Mu'minin. And 'Arafat is for Mawlana Rasulullah. And Muzdalifah is for Janab Bibi Fatima al-Zahra. Yes.

Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. Allahumma ashraf al-fatiha hadiyyatan wa wasilatan saniyyatan zakiyyatan mardiyyatan ila arwah al-khamsat al-ashbah al-athar wa ila ruh Sayyidina Ali bin Hibatullah qaddas Allahu ruhahu wa anwara darihahu wa da'afa 'alayna min barakatihi wa lazzatihi wa ta'yidatihi wa taqabbal minna ya Allah al-ifadah wa'l-istifadah bi-ahsani ma yakun bi-haqqi Sayyidina Muhammadin wa alihi ajma'in wa sallim. Al-Fatihah. [Recitation of Surah al-Fatihah] Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. [Du'as and Fatihas are recited].
