# The Sword and the State: Jihad, Governance, and Justice

**The Obligation of Jihad and the Virtues Therein**

Allah Almighty said: "Fighting is ordained for you, though it is hateful to you. It may be that you dislike something that is good for you, and it may be that you love something that is bad for you." [Al-Baqarah: 216] He said: "When the sacred months have passed, slay the polytheists wherever you find them." [Al-Tawbah: 5] And He said: "Permission is granted to those who are fought against because they have been wronged, and Allah is indeed able to grant them victory; those who were driven from their homes unjustly, only because they said, 'Our Lord is Allah.'" [Al-Hajj: 39–40]

Al-Sadiq, Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع), said: The earth and all that is in it belongs to Allah, to His friends, and to the believers among His servants. Whatever of it lies in the hands of the people of disbelief and misguidance, they hold only by usurpation. From this, what the believers overcome and reclaim from the hands of the polytheists is called fay'. Fay' means "return"; one says fā'a al-fay', that is, the shadow returned. Allah Almighty said: "But if they return, then Allah is Forgiving, Merciful" [Al-Baqarah: 226], meaning that they returned to their wives. Likewise, whatever the people of truth recover of what had been in the hands of the people of falsehood is among that which Allah has restored to them, that is, returned to them. From this comes His saying, "What Allah restored to His Messenger" [Al-Hashr: 7], meaning returned to him. And this is the meaning of His words, "Permission is granted to those who are fought against because they have been wronged" [Al-Hajj: 39]: the people of truth are meant, while those who wrong them are the people of falsehood.

Because the people of falsehood had overcome what Allah Almighty had granted to the people of truth, He gave the people of truth permission to fight those who had oppressed them and seized what He had made theirs. He made it obligatory upon the Muslims to wage jihad against the disbelievers among those who were given the Book, until they either submit or pay the jizyah while in a state of subjection. He said, exalted be the Speaker: "Fight those who do not believe in Allah or the Last Day, who do not forbid what Allah and His Messenger have forbidden, and who do not follow the religion of truth from among those who were given the Book, until they pay the jizyah from their hand while they are subdued." [Al-Tawbah: 29] And He made obligatory upon them the fighting of the polytheists who are not People of the Book until they submit, saying, exalted be the Speaker: "And fight the polytheists all together as they fight you all together." [Al-Tawbah: 36] And He said: "When the sacred months have passed, slay the polytheists wherever you find them, and capture them, besiege them, and sit in wait for them at every place of ambush. But if they repent, establish prayer, and give zakah, then let them go their way." [Al-Tawbah: 5]

From the polytheists who are not People of the Book, nothing was accepted but Islam or the sword. From the People of the Book, the jizyah was accepted on the condition that they submit to the rule of Islam, until Allah Almighty guides whom He guides among them and he turns to Him, or until there perishes upon his error whoever perishes, the proof having already been established against them.

Allah Almighty urged jihad in His path in His Book and upon the tongue of His Messenger (ص); He commanded it and exhorted to it. He said, exalted be His praise: "Go forth, light and heavy, and strive with your wealth and your selves in the way of Allah." [Al-Tawbah: 41] Al-Sadiq, Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع), said concerning the words of Allah, "Go forth, light and heavy": He said, that is, the young and the old.

Allah, blessed and exalted, said: "Indeed, Allah has purchased from the believers their lives and their wealth in exchange for Paradise. They fight in the way of Allah, so they slay and are slain. It is a promise binding upon Him in the Torah, the Gospel, and the Qur'an. And who is more faithful to his covenant than Allah? So rejoice in the sale you have contracted with Him, and that is the great triumph." [Al-Tawbah: 111]

Abu Abdullah, Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع), was asked about this verse. It was said to him: "Is everyone who strives in the way of Allah among the people of this verse?" He (ع) said: "No. Allah Almighty said that He purchased from the believers their lives and their wealth in exchange for Paradise, then He promised them further, and He described those who deserve this after the verse with their qualities, saying: 'The repentant, the worshippers, the praisers, the wanderers, the bowing, the prostrating, those who enjoin what is good and forbid what is evil, and those who observe the limits of Allah; and give glad tidings to the believers.' [Al-Tawbah: 112]" So whoever possesses these qualities is among those to whom Allah Almighty has given the promise stated in the verse. But whoever does not possess these qualities and strives seeking the fleeting gains of this world and its glory, or is coerced into jihad while not keeping his religion and not being among the people of this description that Allah Almighty set out in His Book, is among those of whom the Messenger of Allah (ص) said: "Allah will surely support this religion through a people who have no share in it."

The Messenger of Allah (ص) said: "The strivers in the way of Allah are the leaders of the people of Paradise." And the Prophet (ص) said: "Concerning every comfort a man will be questioned, save what was in the way of Allah." And he (ص) said: "Above every act of righteousness is another act of righteousness, until a man is slain in the way of Allah," meaning that there is no righteousness above that. And he (ص) said: "There is no drop more beloved to Allah than a drop of blood shed in the way of Allah, or a drop of tears shed from fear of Allah." And he (ص) said that Allah and His angels send blessings upon the owners of horses, upon whoever keeps and prepares them in the way of Allah. And he (ص) said: "The provision spent on the horses tethered in the way of Allah is the very spending of which Allah Almighty said: 'Those who spend their wealth by night and by day, secretly and openly.' [Al-Baqarah: 274]"

Ali (ع) said: "Strive in the way of Allah with your hands; if you are unable, then strive with your tongues; and if you are unable, then strive with your hearts." And he (ع) said: "Jihad in the way of Allah is a gate among the gates of Paradise." And he (ع) said concerning the words of Allah Almighty, "And the garment of taqwa, that is best" [Al-A'raf: 26]: "It is the garment of weapons in the way of Allah."

He (ع) said: Jihad in the way of Allah is an obligation upon all Muslims, by the words of Allah Almighty, "Fighting is ordained for you." If a group of the Muslims undertakes the jihad and suffices in it, the obligation is lifted from the rest who remain behind, until those who have undertaken it come to need reinforcement. If they need it, then it becomes obligatory upon all the Muslims to reinforce them until they are sufficed. And he recited the words of Allah Almighty, "It was not for the believers to go forth all at once" [Al-Tawbah: 122], meaning when a group of them has undertaken the jihad.

The Messenger of Allah (ص) said: There is no obligation of jihad upon the bedouin among the Muslims except when they are needed, and they have no share in the fay' so long as they do not strive. The likes of the bedouin today are the likes of the people of the outlying lands, the deserts, and the towns who do not fight well and have no desire for jihad. The Messenger of Allah (ص) granted the coward a dispensation to hold back from fighting, and said that a coward should not go on a raid, for he may be routed quickly; rather, let him consider what he had intended to equip himself with for the raid, and let him equip another with it, for he shall have the like of that man's reward, and nothing of his reward shall be diminished. So those we have mentioned, who are cowardly in fighting and do not know it, and who are in the condition of the bedouin, if they possess wealth, are obliged to spend it in the way of Allah, because Allah Almighty imposed jihad upon the Muslims with their selves and their wealth. Whoever is unable to strive with his person must strive with his wealth, as the Messenger of Allah (ص) said concerning the coward.

If a grave calamity should fall upon the Muslims, and we seek refuge in Allah from it, then it is a duty upon all people to go forth in the way of Allah. In this is the saying of Allah Almighty, "Go forth, light and heavy" [Al-Tawbah: 41], and His saying, "And fight the polytheists all together" [Al-Tawbah: 36]. At such a time the common people go forth, the free and the slave, the old and the young alike, until Allah Almighty repels from them what has befallen them. There is no jihad upon slaves in any circumstance other than this, unless their masters take them out to it, nor upon women, nor upon boys. Yet if a woman wishes to go out with her husband, or with a close kinsman within the forbidden degrees (mahram), to tend the sick and the wounded, to serve the strivers, and to help with whatever she is able and has the strength for, there is no harm in that. If she has a husband, she may not go out except with her husband's permission; and likewise the slave may not go out except with his master's permission.

**Supplication, Righteous Deeds, and the Etiquette of Travel in Jihad**

Allah Almighty said: "And when they went forth against Goliath and his soldiers, they said: 'Our Lord, pour upon us patience, make firm our feet, and grant us victory over the disbelieving people.'" [Al-Baqarah: 250] And Allah Almighty said: "The Messenger has believed in what was revealed to him from his Lord, and so have the believers" [Al-Baqarah: 285], up to His words: "You are our Protector, so grant us victory over the disbelieving people." [Al-Baqarah: 286]

The Messenger of Allah (ص) said: No man who intends a journey appoints over his family a deputy better than two rak'ahs he prays at his departure, then says: "O Allah, I entrust to You myself, my family, my wealth, my religion, my worldly life, my Hereafter, my trust, and the conclusion of my deeds." No believer does this but that Allah grants him what he asked.

Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع) said: When you intend a journey, pray two rak'ahs, then say this saying, and then say: "O Allah, protect me and protect what is with me, and bring me and what is with me to my destination in Your fair conveyance." And ask Him your needs for what you intend of your journey, and for those of your family you leave behind, and for whatever else.

Abu Ja'far, Muhammad ibn Ali (ع), said: When my father, Ali ibn al-Husayn (ع), wished to travel or to go out to some of his property, he would pray two rak'ahs and supplicate with whatever was easy for him when he wished to set out. Then, when he placed his foot in the stirrup, he would purchase his safety from Allah with whatever he could, meaning that he would give charity at that moment. And when Allah brought him home in safety, he would praise Allah and thank Him and again give charity with whatever was easy.

The Commander of the Believers, Ali (ع), went out on one of his journeys, and when he was settled upon his mount he said: "Praise be to Allah, who has favored us of His bounty with what we cannot number. May Allah bless Muhammad, His Prophet, and his family. Glory be to Him who has subjected this to us, for we could not have done it ourselves, and indeed to our Lord we shall return." This is taken from the Book of Allah, from His words, "that you may settle yourselves upon it," the verse. [Az-Zukhruf: 13] And Ali (ع) said: "I bear witness that there is no god but Allah alone, having no partner, and I bear witness that Muhammad is His servant and His Messenger. O Allah, I seek refuge in You from the hardship of travel, the gloom of return, and the evil sight in family, wealth, and children. O Allah, You are the Companion in travel, the Deputy over the family, and the One whose aid is sought in every affair. Fold up for us the far distance, ease for us its ruggedness, and suffice us in what weighs upon us, for You are powerful over all things."

He (ع) used to say: It is of the way of travel that when a people set out and gather and keep company on the journey, they should pool their provisions and spend from them together, for that is more wholesome for their souls and better for the bond between them.

Al-Sadiq, Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع), said: Manly virtue (muruwwa) is of two kinds: a muruwwa in settled life and a muruwwa in travel. As for the muruwwa in settled life, it is the recitation of the Qur'an, the frequenting of the mosques, the company of the people of good, and the study of jurisprudence. As for the muruwwa in travel, it is generosity with one's provision, the abandonment of dispute with one's companions, and speaking well of them once they have parted.

The Messenger of Allah (ص) forbade that riding beasts be neglected until they perish, that they be burdened beyond their strength, or that a man remain seated upon one for no need. He said: Many a ridden beast is better than the one who rides it, more devoted to Allah and more given to His remembrance. And he said: A riding beast has six rights upon its owner: that he begin with its fodder when he alights, that he offer it water when he passes by water, that he not strike it except for a just cause, that he not burden it with what it cannot bear, that he not compel it to a journey beyond its strength, and that he not remain halted upon it for a period without need.

It is related of Ali (ع) that he said one day: "By Him who sent Muhammad with the truth and ennobled his household through him, there is nothing by which you are afflicted but that it is in the Qur'an. Whoever wishes to question me, let him question me." A man rose to him and said: "O Commander of the Believers, my riding beast has become exceedingly stubborn toward me, and I am in dread of it." He said: "Recite into its right ear: 'And to Him has submitted whoever is in the heavens and the earth, willingly and unwillingly, and to Him they will be returned.' [Al 'Imran: 83]" The man did so, and his beast became docile to him.

Once the people crowded a road while traveling with the Messenger of Allah (ص) on one of his expeditions, and he commanded a crier to call out: "Whoever narrows a road has no jihad." And he said: "The owner of a riding beast has more right to the main track than the man on foot, and the barefoot man has more right to it than the one wearing sandals." And he (ص) said: "Allah loves gentleness and helps toward it. When you ride these dumb beasts, if the land is barren, hasten upon them while there is yet marrow in them," urging them to press on while the beasts still had their vigor and had not grown lean, "that you may pass out of the barren stretch; and if the land is fertile, alight with them at its resting places. Travel by night, for the earth is folded up by night and is not folded up by day. Do not encamp in the middle of the roads, for they are the runs of wild beasts and the lairs of serpents." And the Messenger of Allah (ص) commanded those on foot to quicken their pace when marching, which is a light trot, and said that it drives away weariness.

And the Messenger of Allah (ص) said: A protection for my community from drowning, when they board a ship, is that they recite as they embark, "In the name of Allah, the Most Merciful, the Most Compassionate," and: "They have not appraised Allah with the appraisal due to Him, while the whole earth will be within His grip on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens folded in His right hand. Exalted is He and high above what they associate with Him. [Az-Zumar: 67]" and: "In the name of Allah is its course and its anchorage; indeed my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful." And it is related of Ali (ع) that he added to this supplication: "O Allah, bless us in our vessel, make our passage good, and keep us safe from the evil of our sea."

**What Is Due to the Commanders of Armies from Those Under Them**

Allah Almighty said: "O you who believe, obey Allah, obey the Messenger, and those in authority among you." [Al-Nisa: 59] They committed their authority to the Imams (عليهم السلام), to whom belongs the whole of the command; and whomever the Imams place over a matter is the guardian of that matter, not overstepping what they have appointed him to, and obedience to him is obligatory in what they have entrusted to him, in that which is right. But if he commands an evil, or contradicts the command of his Imam and transgresses against him, then there is no obedience owed to him.

It is related of the Messenger of Allah (ص) that he sent out a company and set over them a man from the Ansar, and commanded them to obey him. The man was hard of temper, and he grew angry with them over some matter. He said: "Gather firewood for me." They did so. Then he ordered them to add to it until they had gathered much, and then he ordered them to kindle a fire in it. When it blazed up, he said: "Did not the Messenger of Allah (ص) command you to obey me?" They said: "Yes." He said: "Then enter this fire." Some of them were about to do so out of obedience, but others among them held them back and said: "We only fled to the Messenger of Allah (ص) from the fire." They remained thus until the fire went out and the man's anger subsided. When word of this reached the Messenger of Allah (ص), he said: "Had they entered it, they would never have come out of it."

The Prophet (ص) taught that his community would be kept safe from drowning if, upon embarking on a vessel, they recited: *"In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. They did not esteem Allah as He deserves to be esteemed, yet the whole earth is in His grip on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens are folded in His right hand; exalted is He above what they associate with Him"* [al-Zumar: 67], and then: *"In the name of Allah is its course and its anchorage; indeed, my Lord is Forgiving and Merciful."* It is transmitted from 'Alī (ع) that he added to this supplication: "O Allah, bless us in our vessel, make our journey excellent, and preserve us from the evil of our sea."

Consider next what the commanders of armies are obliged to observe toward those under their command. Allah the Almighty said: *"O you who believe, obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in authority among you"* [al-Nisā': 59]. Those to whom this command entrusts authority are the Imams (عليهم السلام), who bear the whole of it. Whoever holds authority over a matter is the guardian of that matter, and it is obligatory to obey him in what is good. But if he commands something evil, or issues an order that openly contradicts the command of his own Imam, no obedience is owed him in that.

It was narrated that the Messenger of Allah (ص) once dispatched a man in command over a group from the Ansar and instructed them to obey him. The commander grew angry over something and said, "Gather wood for me." They did so. He ordered them to gather more, until a great pile had been assembled, and then he ordered it set alight. When the fire was blazing, he said, "Did not the Messenger of Allah (ص) command you to obey me?" They said, "Yes." He then ordered them to enter the fire. Some among them were inclined toward obedience and moved toward it, but others held them back, saying, "We fled to the Messenger of Allah (ص) precisely to escape the fire." They remained in this state until the fire died down and the commander's anger subsided. When word of this reached the Messenger of Allah (ص), he said: "Had they entered it, they would not have come out of it until the Day of Resurrection. Obedience is only in what is good."

Thus, when an Imam appoints a commander or assigns a man to a task, that man is to obey him, carry out his orders, complete what he is charged with, and never step ahead of him in any matter, for obedience to that commander is obedience to Allah, obedience to the Messenger of Allah, and obedience to the Imam who appointed him. If those under command come to believe that he has exceeded what he was charged with, or object to some conduct of his, they should refer the matter to the Imam. Once they have reported it, their responsibility is discharged and nothing further is upon them; the matter then rests with the Imam (ع), who examines it according to what Allah the Almighty has disclosed to him. But if a man openly breaks from obedience to the Imam and stands in declared opposition to him, his claim to the obedience of the others ceases, and it becomes obligatory for those the Imam appoints for this purpose, and for those who answer a just leader, to fight against him.

Whoever is summoned by a just Imam to a task he assigns must answer that summons, taking on what he is capable of and able to perform. He must not, however, hold office under unjust rulers and the partisans of prejudice, nor lend his aid to their works. It has been narrated from Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع) that he said: "Guardianship under the just, working with them, assisting them in their governance, and earning through them and with them, all of this is lawful and permitted. But guardianship under corrupt and unjust rulers, serving as their agent, supporting their authority, and earning through them and with them, this is forbidden and prohibited." The Messenger of Allah (ص) forbade assisting wrongdoers, and it was said: "The oppressor, the one who assists him, and the one content with him are partners in the sin."

Consider now what the commanders themselves are obliged to observe. Allah the Almighty said: *"Indeed, Allah enjoins justice and charity"* [al-Nahl: 90], and He said: *"Indeed, Allah commands you to restore trusts to their rightful owners, and when you judge between people, to judge with justice"* [al-Nisā': 58]. In the covenant that the Messenger of Allah (ص) gave to one of the commanders of his armies, he directed him to let his heart be filled with mercy for those entrusted to him, with tenderness toward them and kindness in his dealings with them, and not to be a predator over them, pouncing upon their slips and stumbles. For these men are your brothers in lineage and your equals in creation. Error escapes them, afflictions befall them, and their hands work amiss and mistake. So grant them of your pardon and your forbearance in the measure you would wish pardon and forbearance to be granted to you. Deal justly with your own self and with those closest to you as you deal justly with others. Do not lay bare the faults and hidden failings of the people when these are veiled from you; rather, let the most hateful of men in your sight be the one who exposes such things to you. Keep close to the people of piety and truthfulness and to those of sound understanding. Let no abundance of praise for you please you, for abundant praise is a summons to vanity. Acknowledge the good of those who do good, and overlook in the wrongdoer what may rightly be overlooked. Reward each man according to his effort, whether he is noble or lowly, and judge among them with justice, for judgment with justice is the balance of equity that Allah has placed upon the earth. Establish the prescribed limits upon their proper course, and give every possessor of a right his right. Keep your covenant, fulfill your pledge, and beware of hastening to shed blood without verification and clear proof. And the Messenger of Allah (ص) said: "None may enjoin the good or forbid the evil except one in whom there are three qualities: gentleness in what he enjoins and gentleness in what he forbids, justice in what he enjoins and justice in what he forbids, and knowledge of what he enjoins and knowledge of what he forbids."

As for the call to the truth before fighting, Allah the Almighty said: *"Invite to the way of your Lord with wisdom and good counsel"* [al-Nahl: 125]. When the Messenger of Allah (ص) sent out an army or a detachment, he would counsel its commander to fear Allah in his own person and to treat well the Muslims who were with him, and he would say: "Advance in the name of Allah, for the sake of Allah, and upon the religion of the Messenger of Allah. Do not fight a people until you have first presented the call to them. Invite them to bear witness that there is no god but Allah and that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and to acknowledge what I have brought from Allah. If they answer you, they are your brothers in religion. Then invite them to move from their land to the land of the emigrants. If they do so, well and good; but if they decline, inform them that they shall be as the bedouin of the Muslims, subject to the judgment of Allah that governs all Muslims, though they shall have no share in the spoils or the booty. If they have already embraced Islam, call them to pay the jizya from a willing hand while they remain under authority. If they answer to that, accept it from them and hold your hand from them. But if they refuse, then seek the help of Allah against them and fight them. Do not kill a child, an aged man, or a woman, that is, so long as they do not fight you. Do not mutilate, do not betray a trust, and do not break a pledge." This is what the Messenger of Allah (ص) commanded, that the polytheists be called to Islam before fighting.

Whoever calls them in this manner has done well, and likewise, when relations with the people of rebellion have deteriorated, they too are to be called to return to the truth, to enter into obedience to the just Imam, and to submit to sound judgment before the sword is raised. If, however, they already know full well what they are being summoned to and what is being fought over, then should they open the fighting before any call is made, there is no harm in meeting them in kind. The Messenger of Allah (ص) raided the Banū al-Mustaliq and fell upon them without issuing a fresh call at that moment, killing their fighters and taking their women and children captive, coming upon them while they were unaware, and this was because the call had already reached them in their own tongue. 'Alī (ع) said: "There is no harm in fighting before the call, for the people today already know what they are being summoned to."

As for what is recommended in combat and before it, it is established that the Messenger of Allah (ص) sent a man from Khuzā'ah ahead of him as a scout in the year of al-Hudaybiyah, when he intended the lesser pilgrimage, to gather the reports of Quraysh and bring them to him; and he would send advance parties before his armies to uncover ambush points and probe the enemy's news. He (ص) had a trench dug around the encampment of his army at Uhud, and he would instruct his companions to adopt a watchword by which they would call to and recognize one another amid the fighting and the mingling of the ranks. He would command them to patience and remind them of the reward, would deal sternly with flight, and would rouse them to steadfastness. When he met the enemy he (ص) would say: "O Allah, You are my protection, my helper, and my defender. O Allah, by You I attack, by You I prevail, and by You I fight." And on the day of Uhud he said: "O Allah, to You is all praise, to You is the complaint, and You are the One whose help is sought." Then Jibrīl (ع) came down to him and said, "O Muhammad, you have called upon Allah by His greatest name." He (ص) also said: "Seize the moment of supplication at five occasions: at the recitation of the Qur'an, at the call to prayer, at the descent of the rain, at the meeting of the two ranks in battle, and at the supplication of the wronged, for none of these is veiled from the Throne."

When the Messenger of Allah (ص) met the enemy, he would draw up the men, draw up the horses, and set the camels and the baggage-train behind them, so that his numbers might appear the greater. He would separate the tribes in the ordering of the ranks, placing each company, that is, each tribe, on one side with its own banner that it knew, so that whoever became cut off from his tribe might look to its banner and rejoin it.

'Alī (ع) did not like to open the fighting until the sun had passed its zenith and the winds had begun to blow. He engaged in single combat many times, and never did he face a man in single combat but he slew him. Recounting the day Marhab challenged him to single combat at Khaybar, he said: "The Messenger of Allah (ص) taught me what to say at the moment of single combat: 'O Allah, grant me victory and do not give victory against me; O Allah, prevail for me and do not turn the tide against me; O Allah, take charge of me and do not set another over me; O Allah, make me one who remembers You, thankful to You, faithful, and obedient.' I slew Marhab that day and left his spoils where they lay, for I would kill and not take the spoils."

The supplication of the Messenger of Allah (ص) on the day of al-Ahzāb was: "O Aid of the distressed, O Answerer of those who cry out, lift my anguish from me, for You know my state and the state of my companions, and spare me the terrors of my enemy." And 'Alī (ع), when he put on his coat of mail for battle, would say: "O Allah, You are my protection."

'Alī (ع) taught that when the Muslims stand facing their enemy and have taken up their ranks, each man among them must keep to his post. If he sees an unguarded opening in the enemy he may seize it, then return to his place. When the enemy opens the assault, they are to hold their posts and stand firm, as Allah the Almighty said: *"O you who believe, when you meet a company, stand firm and remember Allah much, that you may succeed"* [al-Anfāl: 45], and as He said: *"Indeed, Allah loves those who fight in His cause in ranks, as though they were a solid structure"* [al-Saff: 4]. If the enemy is routed, he said, they are not to be pursued outright until the rout is complete and any counter-charge is secured against; only then does the whole force press forward and press hard in the slaughter. And should there be, Allah forbid, a rout among the Muslims, the commander, and the Imam if he is present, must stand fast, and the people must rally one another to return, reminding one another of what Allah has promised to those who hold firm, and warning of the fate of those who turn their backs. He recalled the steadfastness of the Messenger of Allah (ص) on the day of Uhud, when most of the people had scattered from him, saying: "I remained with the Messenger of Allah (ص) upon the rock, shielding him with my own body, warding off the blows once with my hand and once with my face, while the Messenger of Allah (ص) was wounded and many of the people had made off toward Medina, some saying that the Messenger of Allah (ص) had been slain. Yet he stood firm until Allah the Almighty routed the polytheists away from him."

He said, too, that there is no harm in a single fighter charging a whole squadron if he has confidence in himself, and no harm in his advancing with the spear, thrusting with it so that his companions may rise up around him with their swords and their spears and whatever weapons they carry, provided this is not done recklessly. He then cited the words of Allah the Almighty: *"So do not turn your backs to them. Whoever turns his back to them on that day, unless maneuvering for battle or falling back to a company, has drawn upon himself the wrath of Allah, and his refuge is Hell, and wretched is the destination"* [al-Anfāl: 15]. He said: "Fleeing from the battlefield is among the gravest of sins." There is no harm in turning the backs, as Allah the Almighty allowed, when it is done to regroup and rejoin a company; the condemnation was mentioned only for headlong flight and rout. Allah the Almighty had first made it an obligation upon the Muslims that they stand firm against ten times their number, saying: *"If there are twenty of you who are steadfast, they will overcome two hundred; and if there are a hundred of you, they will overcome a thousand"* [al-Anfāl: 65]. This weighed heavily upon the Muslims, so Allah lightened it for them, saying: *"Now Allah has lightened your burden, knowing that there is weakness in you. So if there are a hundred of you who are steadfast, they will overcome two hundred; and if there are a thousand of you, they will overcome two thousand"* [al-Anfāl: 66]. Therefore, if a man flees from two of the polytheists, or from fewer, or from a company equal to his own number or less, he has fallen under the ruling of the threat and committed one of the grave sins. But if they withdraw from a force greater than that after they have exhausted their utmost effort and reached the limit of their strength, there is nothing against them.

When they break off from the fighting, they should withdraw in good order and travel likewise, keeping watch against the enemy's ambushes and stratagems. If they have driven the enemy back to their fortresses or their trenches, they are not to turn away until they have spent their full effort and reached the utmost of their capacity; and if the enemy lays siege to them, they are to fight them.

Concerning the slaying of the polytheists, Allah the Almighty said: *"So slay the polytheists wherever you find them, and seize them, and besiege them, and lie in wait for them"* [al-Tawba: 5], and He said: *"And slay them wherever you overtake them, and drive them out from where they drove you out"* [al-Baqara: 191]. It has come from the Imams (عليهم السلام) that they permitted the killing of the polytheists by weapon, by fire, by stones, and by water, and by whatever means their killing can be accomplished, and that catapults and stone-throwing engines be set against them when they take refuge in their fortresses.

The teaching now turns from the vows a person binds upon himself to the far heavier matter of how the community meets its enemies in the field, for here too the measure is justice and not appetite, and the ruler is bound by revealed limits at every step.

On the killing of the polytheists, Allah Almighty said: ﴿فَاقْتُلُوا الْمُشْرِكِينَ حَيْثُ وَجَدْتُمُوهُمْ وَخُذُوهُمْ وَاحْصُرُوهُمْ وَاقْعُدُوا لَهُمْ﴾ "Kill the polytheists wherever you find them, and capture them, and besiege them, and sit in wait for them." [Al-Tawbah: 5] And He said: ﴿وَاقْتُلُوهُمْ حَيْثُ ثَقِفْتُمُوهُمْ وَأَخْرِجُوهُم مِّنْ حَيْثُ أَخْرَجُوكُمْ﴾ "And kill them wherever you encounter them and drive them out from where they drove you out." [Al-Baqarah: 191] It has been narrated from the Imams (عليهم السلام) that they permitted the killing of polytheists by weapons, by fire, by stones, by water, and by anything else through which they could be killed, and that catapults and armored siege engines were to be deployed against them when they had fortified themselves in strongholds.

Yet the sword is not loosed without restraint. When there are Muslims and dhimmis among the enemy, along with those who ought not to be killed, such as children, women, the elderly, and the incapacitated who take no part in the fighting, one must not aim at them deliberately, and care must be taken on their account. Whoever deliberately kills a child, a woman, an elderly person, or an incapacitated person among the polytheists or their monks has sinned. As for such persons who are killed while the Muslims are engaged against the polytheists without any deliberate intent, there is nothing upon the Muslim for that. And whoever among the polytheists has shown kindness to the Muslims is not to be killed. The Messenger of Allah (ص) said to the Muslims on the Day of Badr, "Whoever you are able to capture from the Bani Abd al-Muttalib, do not kill him, for they were brought out against you unwillingly."

In the same way, whoever among the polytheists shows a sign of Islam is not to be killed. The Messenger of Allah (ص) once dispatched an army toward the tribe of Khath'am, and when the enemy became aware of the force, some of them prostrated themselves in submission, yet some were killed while still in prostration. The Messenger of Allah (ص) condemned this and ordered that half the blood money be paid for them. Then he said, "I am free of every Muslim who takes up residence among polytheists." He also forbade the killing of envoys. So if it becomes known that one who has entered the abode of Islam without any covenant of safe conduct is an envoy of the polytheists, he is not to be killed, and this holds even if he claims to be an envoy while bringing no proof and his mission cannot be verified. In such a case the Imam has a choice: if he wishes he may kill him, if he wishes he may take him captive, and if he wishes he may release him. There is no harm in imprisoning the envoy when his conduct gives cause for concern and there is fear in releasing him, unless the Imam is reassured on that score, in which case he sets him free and exercises his own judgment in the matter.

On captives and those granted security, Allah Almighty said: ﴿فَإِذَا لَقِيتُمُ الَّذِينَ كَفَرُوا فَضَرْبَ الرِّقَابِ حَتَّى إِذَا أَثْخَنتُمُوهُمْ فَشُدُّوا الْوَثَاقَ فَإِمَّا مَنًّا بَعْدُ وَإِمَّا فِدَاءً حَتَّى تَضَعَ الْحَرْبُ أَوْزَارَهَا﴾ "When you meet those who disbelieve, strike the necks until, when you have subdued them, bind the bonds firmly. Then either show favour afterward or take ransom, until the war lays down its burdens." [Muhammad: 4] On the Day of Badr the Messenger of Allah (ص) took captive a group from Quraysh, taking ransom from some, releasing some as a favour, and putting some to death. The Imam likewise has a choice regarding prisoners: if he wishes he may kill them, if he wishes he may release them as a favour, if he wishes he may exchange them for Muslim captives, and if he wishes he may take ransom from the polytheists or from the captives themselves when they possess wealth in the abode of war. Whatever is found in their hands is subject to his consideration. He must weigh each case and seek in it what is most pleasing to Allah Almighty.

Among those captured on the Day of Badr was al-Abbas, the uncle of the Messenger of Allah (ص), whose true intention the Prophet already knew, for he had been brought out unwillingly with a group of the Bani Abd al-Muttalib. After his capture al-Abbas said, "O Prophet of Allah, I had already accepted Islam." The Prophet replied, "As for that, Allah knows best. But your outward conduct was against us, so ransom yourself if you wish." He was bound in the cords with the rest of the captives, and when the tightness of the bonds pained him, the Messenger of Allah (ص) groaned out of tenderness for him through the night, for nothing else was open to him but what had been done. On that day Aqeel ibn Abi Talib was also taken captive, and his place with the Messenger of Allah (ص) was a place of nearness, for the Prophet would say to him, "I love you with a love for your kinship and your standing, and with a love for the love that Abu Talib bore you." Ali (ع) passed by Aqeel that day while he was among the captives and turned away from him, and Aqeel called out, "O my brother, why is this turning away from me while you see me?" but he gave no answer. When the Messenger of Allah (ص) was told of Aqeel's state, they went to him, and when Aqeel saw the Prophet he said, "O Messenger of Allah, do not let the transgressor Abu Jahl escape you. If you have not killed him, then seek him out while the rout still lasts." The Messenger of Allah (ص) smiled and said, "Rather, Allah has already killed him." Then he said to al-Abbas, "Ransom Aqeel along with yourself, for he has no wealth and you are a man of means." Al-Abbas said, "O Messenger of Allah, ounces of gold were seized with me, so count them toward my ransom." He replied, "That is spoil which Allah has bestowed upon the Muslims. But send for what you had left behind for yourself at Makkah." Al-Abbas said, "I left no wealth there." The Prophet said, "Glory be to Allah. Then where is the wealth you deposited with Umm al-Fadl on the day of your departure, telling her to guard it until you returned, and saying that if death overtook you she should do with it such and such?" Al-Abbas stared at him and said, "I bear witness that you are truly the Messenger of Allah. By Allah, none knew of this but she and I, and none could have disclosed it to you save your Lord." He then sent for the wealth and ransomed himself and Aqeel with it.

The Imam, and whoever the Imam appoints in his place, must examine each captive taken from the polytheists. If killing the fighters among them is of greater benefit to the Muslims, he kills the combatants; if their enslavement is better, he enslaves them and casts lots over them; and if showing favour or accepting ransom is better, he does that. In every case he does what is best and looks into it by what Allah Almighty shows him.

If the polytheists seek security and come down to the ruling of the Muslims, or to the ruling of an arbitrator chosen from among the Muslims, then whatever the arbitrator decides that lies within what is permissible is binding and is carried out: whether he rules that the fighters be killed, that the offspring be taken captive, that they be enslaved, or that they be granted the standing of dhimmis if they refuse Islam. But if he rules otherwise, for instance that they be left untouched and unraided, that they be neither enslaved nor killed nor made to pay the jizyah, or any ruling that contradicts the Book of Allah Almighty and the Sunnah of His Prophet (ص), his ruling is overturned and does not stand. They are returned to their place of safety and are fought until they submit or pay the jizyah. When they have come down to the ruling of the commander of the armies, no one else may rule over them except with their consent, and when they have come down to the ruling of a particular man, none may judge among them but the one they named. The Messenger of Allah (ص) once had the Banu Qurayzah come down to the ruling of Sa'd ibn Mu'adh, and Sa'd ruled that their fighters be killed, their offspring and women taken captive, and their wealth divided. The Messenger of Allah (ص) upheld his ruling over them and said, "You have judged among them by the judgment of Allah from above the seven heavens." And if they come down to the ruling of a man who dies before he can judge, it is best and clearest that they either accept another to judge among them or be returned to their place of safety and fought again.

The captives must be fed, and even when the captor intends to kill them, they must still be fed, for Allah Almighty says: ﴿وَيُطْعِمُونَ الطَّعَامَ عَلَى حُبِّهِ مِسْكِينًا وَيَتِيمًا وَأَسِيرًا﴾ "And they feed, out of love for Him, the poor, the orphan, and the captive." [Al-Insan: 8] As for a Muslim held captive by the enemy, it is an obligation upon the Muslims to ransom him when they are able. Al-Husayn ibn Ali (ع) was asked upon whom the ransom of a captive falls, and he said, "Upon the people of the land for which he was fighting." As for one taken captive under other circumstances, his ransom falls upon the Muslims at large as a binding obligation; and whoever ransoms him freely as a charitable act is rewarded, if Allah wills.

When a Muslim grants security to a body of polytheists and they come down upon his guarantee, it is not permitted to betray it. The Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "The blood of the Muslims is of equal worth, and the least of them may extend their protection." Rather, the commander of the armies presents to them the rule of Islam; if they accept it they are not returned to their former safety, and their fighters are dealt with accordingly. In the same way, if a Muslim who is a slave, or a woman, or any other extends a guarantee of security, it is binding, for the words of the Messenger of Allah (ص), "the least of them may extend their protection." But if the one who granted the security is himself a dhimmi, or a captive, or a child, or a Muslim held in the abode of war among the polytheists, then his grant is not valid. A recognized gesture of security carries the same force as its spoken word, and it is valid in any tongue so long as it is understood and known.

When a polytheist enters the lands of the Muslims under safe conduct with merchandise, a tenth is taken from him on whatever exceeds two hundred dirhams or its value. When he wishes to depart he is not permitted to leave carrying weapons or anything that would strengthen the polytheists in war, such as the instruments of battle drawn from the abode of Islam; and whatever he was prevented from taking out is not withheld from being returned to him within. If a polytheist woman is granted safe conduct and enters the abode of peace, the marriage bond between her and the polytheist man is severed. If a man accepts Islam while in the abode of Islam, whatever wealth and children he left behind in the abode of shirk remain there as spoil, should the Muslims prevail over them; but if he accepted Islam in the abode of shirk and then entered the abode of peace as a Muslim, his young children are Muslims by virtue of his Islam and his wealth is his own. All of this is the teaching of the Ahl al-Bayt (عليهم السلام).

On reconciliation, truce, and the jizyah, Allah Almighty said: ﴿إِلَّا الَّذِينَ عَاهَدْتُمْ مِنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ ثُمَّ لَمْ يَنْقُصُوكُمْ شَيْئًا وَلَمْ يُظَاهِرُوا عَلَيْكُمْ أَحَدًا فَأَتِمُّوا إِلَيْهِمْ عَهْدَهُمْ إِلَى مُدَّتِهِمْ إِنَّ اللَّهَ يُحِبُّ الْمُتَّقِينَ﴾ "Except those of the polytheists with whom you made a covenant, and who then failed you in nothing and supported no one against you: fulfill their covenant to them until their term. Surely Allah loves the God-fearing." [Al-Tawbah: 4] The Messenger of Allah (ص) made a truce with the polytheists of Quraysh in the year of Hudaybiyah. The Imam, and whoever the Imam appoints, looks into reconciliation and truce between the Muslims and the polytheists, and if he sees good in it he grants them a truce for a known term. The most that such a truce may extend is ten consecutive years, and he keeps faith with them so long as he sees good in it. But if afterward he sees that fighting them holds the welfare of the Muslims, he casts their covenant back to them, makes known to them that he will fight them, and grants them a period of grace, setting a term before battle so that they may warn their outlying people. So did the Messenger of Allah (ص) do when Allah Almighty revealed: ﴿بَرَاءَةٌ مِّنَ اللَّهِ وَرَسُولِهِ إِلَى الَّذِينَ عَاهَدتُّم مِّنَ الْمُشْرِكِينَ﴾ "A declaration of immunity from Allah and His Messenger to those polytheists with whom you had made a covenant," and ﴿فَسِيحُوا فِي الْأَرْضِ أَرْبَعَةَ أَشْهُرٍ﴾ "so travel freely in the land for four months." [Al-Tawbah: 1] He sent Ali (ع) with it, who recited it to them during the season of pilgrimage and gave them warning. And if the Imam had taken any wealth from them in exchange for the truce and then wished to dissolve it before its term, he returns to them what he had taken.

If the polytheists who are People of the Book offer the jizyah, it is accepted from them and the sword is withheld from them; but the jizyah is not accepted from the polytheists of the Arabs, who are fought until they submit or are killed. When the dhimmis have settled upon the jizyah, they may not be wronged beyond it, and a known, fixed tribute is levied each year upon whatever cultivated lands and fields lie in their hands. The jizyah is also taken from the Magi, for they are a people of an ancient scripture. Whoever of the people of the jizyah accepts Islam has the jizyah lifted from him, while the land tribute remains upon his land, and he is bound to pay the tithe on what the land yields; and if the land passes to a Muslim it remains tribute land wherever it turns.

The jizyah falls upon the free adult men among the dhimmis, and it is not levied upon children, slaves, or women. They are ranked in three tiers, and each year there is taken from every man of the highest tier, who are the people of ease and abundance, forty-eight dirhams; from every man of the middle tier, twenty-four dirhams; and from every man of the lowest tier, twelve dirhams. If one of them falls into poverty and infirmity and is unable to work, the jizyah is lifted from him, for the word of Allah Almighty: ﴿لَا يُكَلِّفُ اللَّهُ نَفْسًا إِلَّا وُسْعَهَا﴾ "Allah burdens no soul beyond its capacity." [Al-Baqarah: 286] The land tribute falls upon their lands and trees, whether the owner be great or small, man or woman. The jizyah is not imposed upon any of their notable men who is able to bear it, unless there is some benefit and service to Islam in imposing it, in which case the Imam may set it upon such a one if he wishes, or may make use of him against the polytheists in war. The jizyah is also taken from the price of what they sell of things unlawful for Muslims to sell, such as wine and swine and their like, since most of their wealth is unlawful gain; and there is no harm in the Muslims dealing with them and taking such payment from them in the jizyah and in all that is owed. They are not to be humbled beyond their due, nor are their churches to be lodged in, nor is the greeting of peace to be offered to them first; their hands are held to account, and they are barred from raising up new churches in the abode of Islam, though they are left to their old ones to keep and to repair what has decayed or fallen. They are barred from entering the sacred precincts. All of this is the teaching of the Ahl al-Bayt (عليهم السلام).

On the ruling concerning spoils, Allah Almighty said: ﴿فَكُلُوا مِمَّا غَنِمْتُمْ حَلَالًا طَيِّبًا﴾ "So eat of what you have taken as spoils, lawful and good." [Al-Anfal: 69] And He said: ﴿وَاعْلَمُوا أَنَّمَا غَنِمْتُم مِن شَيْءٍ فَأَنَّ لِلَّهِ خُمُسَهُ وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَى وَالْيَتَامَى وَالْمَسَاكِينِ﴾ "And know that whatever you take as spoils, a fifth of it belongs to Allah, and to the Messenger, and to the near kin, and the orphans, and the needy." [Al-Anfal: 41] And He said, regarding the one who steals from the spoils: ﴿وَمَن يَغْلُلْ يَأْتِ بِمَا غَلَّ يَوْمَ الْقِيَامَةِ ثُمَّ تُوَفَّى كُلُّ نَفْسٍ مَّا كَسَبَتْ وَهُمْ لَا يُظْلَمُونَ﴾ "And whoever defrauds will come with what he defrauded on the Day of Resurrection; then every soul will be paid in full for what it earned, and they will not be wronged." [Al Imran: 161] The Messenger of Allah (ص) said of one who had misappropriated a cloak from the spoils, "I saw him in the Fire, the man of the cloak that he had stolen from the plunder."

The Messenger of Allah (ص) once returned from a campaign, and Aqeel ibn Abi Talib was with him. When Aqeel came in upon his wife she said to him, "I know that you have been in the fighting; have you brought us any spoil?" He said, "No, by Allah, except for this needle that I came upon and took," and he drew it out from the edge of his garment and handed it to her, and she began to marvel at what he said. While they were thus, they heard the crier of the Messenger of Allah (ص) calling out, "O people, hand back the needle and the thread; let no one make off with so much as a needle or what is beyond it." So Aqeel said to his wife, "I do not think your needle is anything but lost to you," and he took it from her and cast it back into the spoils.

There is no harm in making use of the spoils in the way of jihad before they are divided, such as the weapon and the mount and their like, but nothing of them is to be sold until they are divided. The commander of the army may choose for himself some choice portion of the spoils as he wishes, without exceeding it. And whatever of the spoils the Muslims are unable to carry away they destroy, burning the goods and the weaponry.

The spoils taken from the enemy in the way of Allah may be turned to the needs of the struggle before they are divided. Weapons, mounts, and the like may be put to use while the fighting is still upon them, but nothing of the booty is to be sold until it has been apportioned. The commander of the army may choose for himself and take from it a single thing that he wishes, no more.

So the Messenger of Allah (ص) sent 'Ali (ع) upon an expedition to Yemen and sent Khalid ibn al-Walid upon another, saying, "If you meet, let 'Ali be the commander over all of you; and if you separate, each of you leads his own force." They met, and their commander was 'Ali (ع). He encountered the enemy, routed them, slew the fighters, and took the offspring captive, and from the booty 'Ali (ع) chose for himself a slave girl. Khalid ibn al-Walid wrote of this to the Messenger of Allah (ص), complaining, and his letter was carried by his courier and delivered to the Prophet. The Prophet (ص) said of 'Ali, "Do not find fault with what 'Ali chose. 'Ali is from me and I am from him, and he is your guardian after me" (علي مني وأنا منه وهو وليكم بعدي). So the Imam, and likewise the commander of a detachment, may each take for himself from the booty, before it is divided, one thing that he wishes.

Whatever of the spoils the Muslims are unable to carry away, they destroy, so that the enemy may not profit from it after them. They burn the goods and the weapons with fire, and they slaughter the beasts and the livestock and burn them as well. They do not mutilate them, nor do they leave behind any portion of the booty they cannot carry for the enemy to make use of after them. As for the property of Muslims that has fallen into the hands of the polytheists, it belongs to the one whose it was; the polytheists' overpowering of it does not remove a Muslim's ownership from him, and nothing removes a Muslim's ownership except that which he himself willingly surrenders.

The polytheists once raided the camels of the Messenger of Allah (ص) and his family, and among them was al-'Adba' (العضباء). They drove them off, taking with them an old woman who had been among the camels. In the night the old woman rose, settled herself upon al-'Adba', and rode until she came to Madinah. The people recognized the she-camel of the Messenger of Allah (ص) and brought her, together with the old woman, to him. She told him what had happened and said, "O Messenger of Allah, I vowed on my journey that if Allah delivered me I would slaughter this camel." The Messenger of Allah (ص) said to her, "Evil is the return you would make of her. There is no binding vow upon a person concerning what he does not own" (لا نذر للمرء فيما لا يملك). And he took back the camel.

When the Imam or the commander of the army sets a reward for one who slays a particular fighter, whether it be the slain man's spoils or some other thing appointed for him, that reward is given from the whole of the booty before it is divided. The Messenger of Allah (ص) did this on the day of Badr, saying, "Whoever kills a man shall have such and such, and whoever takes a captive shall have such and such." When Allah routed the polytheists and they were slain, captured, and put to flight, some of those at whose hands this had been accomplished sought what the Messenger of Allah (ص) had appointed for them. Then Sa'd ibn 'Ubadah (رض) rose, being among those whom the Messenger of Allah (ص) had stationed to guard him, and said, "O Messenger of Allah, what kept us from gaining what these men gained was neither cowardice before the enemy nor indifference to the reward and the booty; rather we feared that your place might be left bare of us and the polytheists fall upon your flank. And if you give these men and that people what they ask, some of the Muslims will return with no share of the booty at all." So Allah, Mighty and Majestic, sent down: ﴿يَسْأَلُونَكَ عَنِ الْأَنْفَالِ قُلِ الْأَنْفَالُ لِلَّهِ وَالرَّسُولِ فَاتَّقُوا اللَّهَ وَأَصْلِحُوا ذَاتَ بَيْنِكُمْ وَأَطِيعُوا اللَّهَ وَرَسُولَهُ إِنْ كُنْتُمْ مُؤْمِنِينَ﴾ "They ask you concerning the spoils. Say: the spoils belong to Allah and the Messenger, so fear Allah and set things right among yourselves, and obey Allah and His Messenger, if you are believers" [al-Anfal: 1]. And the Messenger of Allah (ص) commanded that those to whom he had promised a share be given, from the whole of the booty, what he had promised them.

The commander of the army gives from the booty, before it is divided, in recognition of excellence of standing, whatever he sees fit, in a matter in which there is no portion for himself. Then he takes out a fifth of the booty for the Imam and divides the remaining four-fifths among those who fought over it with their persons and their wealth, in equal measure, so that the horseman receives two shares and the foot soldier one share. Whatever is taken without fighting and without an advance against the enemy belongs to the Imam. Allah, Mighty and Majestic, said: ﴿مَا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ مِنْ أَهْلِ الْقُرَىٰ فَلِلَّهِ وَلِلرَّسُولِ وَلِذِي الْقُرْبَىٰ﴾ "What Allah has restored to His Messenger from the people of the townships belongs to Allah, and to the Messenger, and to the near of kin" [al-Hashr: 7], after His words: ﴿وَمَا أَفَاءَ اللَّهُ عَلَىٰ رَسُولِهِ مِنْهُمْ فَمَا أَوْجَفْتُمْ عَلَيْهِ مِنْ خَيْلٍ وَلَا رِكَابٍ وَلَٰكِنَّ اللَّهَ يُسَلِّطُ رُسُلَهُ عَلَىٰ مَنْ يَشَاءُ وَاللَّهُ عَلَىٰ كُلِّ شَيْءٍ قَدِيرٌ﴾ "And what Allah restored to His Messenger from them, you spurred neither horse nor camel for it; but Allah gives His messengers authority over whom He wills, and Allah is powerful over all things" [al-Hashr: 6].

Al-Sadiq Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع) said: When the Imam dispatches the detachment or the army, or is himself among them, and they meet the polytheists and fight them, then a fifth of what they take is for the Imam, and the four-fifths are divided among the fighters, two shares for the horseman and one for the foot soldier. This is when they strive as Allah, Mighty and Majestic, has enjoined upon them, with their wealth and their persons. But if they go out for a wage, and are given something for their going out, then their portion is the portion of hire, and its gain belongs to the one who hired them for it, whether that be the Imam or one whom the Imam appointed. Those who are present without fighting have nothing thereafter save by the judgment of the Imam, or of the one the Imam appoints over them; and the women who are present have no share in the booty. Whoever fights alongside them, the Imam, or the one the Imam appoints, may assign to him, if he wishes, according to what he sees fit, from the whole of the booty. And whoever flees to the Muslims from among the slaves of the polytheists, or seeks safe conduct with them while his master remains behind, is free. All of this is the word of the Ahl al-Bayt (عليهم السلام).

The ruling now turns to the fighting of the people of rebellion (أهل البغي).

Allah, Mighty and Majestic, said: ﴿وَإِنْ طَائِفَتَانِ مِنَ الْمُؤْمِنِينَ اقْتَتَلُوا فَأَصْلِحُوا بَيْنَهُمَا فَإِنْ بَغَتْ إِحْدَاهُمَا عَلَى الْأُخْرَىٰ فَقَاتِلُوا الَّتِي تَبْغِي حَتَّىٰ تَفِيءَ إِلَىٰ أَمْرِ اللَّهِ﴾ "And if two parties of the believers fall to fighting, make peace between them; but if one of them transgresses against the other, then fight the one that transgresses until it returns to the command of Allah" [al-Hujurat: 9]. Thus Allah, exalted be His mention, has made the struggle against the people of rebellion an obligation upon the Muslims, just as He made the struggle against the polytheists an obligation. Yet this is only under the Imam, or under one whom the Imam has appointed, and it is by this that the people of rebellion are known. It is not left to men to look into the matter by their own opinions, so that whomever they hold to be a rebel they may fight him. Rather, the rebel is one who takes up arms against the Imam, or against the one the Imam has appointed, or who withholds himself, or who withdraws from the Imam's jurisdiction. When the Imam commands that such a one be fought, the people are bound to fight him alongside the Imam; and if the Imam holds back from fighting him for a reason he judges sufficient, they hold back at his holding back and do not fight except that he grant them leave.

'Ali (ع) said: "I was commanded to fight the breakers of the covenant (الناكثين), the deviators (القاسطين), and the renegades (المارقين); the Messenger of Allah (ص) commanded me to that." The breakers of the covenant are the people of Basra, the Companions of the Camel; the renegades are the Kharijites; and the deviators are the people of Syria. "I turned the matter concerning them over upon its back and its belly, its head and its eye, and I found nothing for it but to fight them, or else to disbelieve in what Allah, Mighty and Majestic, sent down upon Muhammad (ص)."

It was related from Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع) that he heard his father, Muhammad ibn 'Ali (ع), make mention of those unjust ones whom 'Ali (ع) fought, and say that they were more grievous in sin than those the Messenger of Allah (ص) had fought. It was said to him, "How is that, O son of the Messenger of Allah?" He said, "Because those were people of ignorance, whereas these had read the Qur'an and knew the merit of the people of merit, yet they did what they did after clear sight." And it has come down that the Messenger of Allah (ص) said to 'Ali (ع), "Your war is my war and your peace is my peace" (حربك حربي وسلمك سلمي), so that whoever fights him has fought the Messenger of Allah (ص).

He (ص) described the Kharijites and said, "They recite the Qur'an, yet it does not pass beyond their throats; they pass out of the religion as the arrow passes through the game. The best of men is he who kills them, and the best of men is he whom they kill." And he (ص) said to 'Ammar, "The rebellious faction shall kill you" (تقتلك الفئة الباغية). So Mu'awiyah and his companions killed him; and when they had heard the tradition, it lay heavy upon Mu'awiyah, and the people of Syria were shaken by it. Then 'Amr ibn al-'As said to them, "It was not you who killed him; rather 'Ali and his companions killed him, for they were the ones who brought him out, and so they were the cause of his death." Word of this reached 'Ali (ع), and he said, "May Allah curse 'Amr. What deficient minds, to have accepted this from him. If it is we who killed him, then the Messenger of Allah (ص) killed those of the Muslims who were martyred at his side."

It was related that 'Ammar (رض) would take no path at Siffin but that the people took it with him, for what they had heard from the Messenger of Allah (ص). On the day he was slain he was heard to say, as he gestured toward the people of Syria, "O Allah, You know that I have not fought them save by the command of Your Messenger, and that I do not know myself to be slain at their hands, as 'Ali told me I would be. Yet did I know that Your pleasure with me lay in kindling a fire and casting myself into it, I would do it; or in throwing myself from this beast of mine and breaking my neck, I would do it. O Allah, You know that I have not fought them save in seeking Your Face, so bring not my striving to nothing, nor give the lie to my hope." Then he turned toward the enemy.

'Ammar looked toward 'Ali (ع) and saw him, and the standard was in the hand of Hashim ibn 'Utbah, who was one-eyed. Fixing his gaze upon the planted standard, 'Ammar urged him on, saying, "O Hashim, one-eyed and a coward? There is no good in a one-eyed man who does not plunge into the fray. Charge with us." Then Hashim seized the standard from the ground, saying, "A one-eyed man seeks a station for his folk; he has grappled with life until he has wearied of it; there is no help for it but that he rout or be routed." Then he charged, and 'Ammar charged with him, saying, "Charge on, O Hashim, for death lies upon the points of the spears, and Paradise lies beneath the gleaming blades. Do you not see the wide-eyed maidens with Muhammad and his band, in the highest company?" And the two did not cease striking and thrusting, and they plunged into the people of Syria and did not return until the mercy of Allah received them as martyrs upon them both.

Two men then disputed before Mu'awiyah over the slaying of 'Ammar, each of them saying, "It was I who killed him." Then 'Abd Allah ibn 'Amr ibn al-'As, who was present with his father, said, "A wonder, that two men should quarrel over which of them shall enter the Fire. I heard the Messenger of Allah (ص) say, 'The rebellious faction shall kill him,' and he said, 'The slayer of 'Ammar and the despoiler of his arms are in the Fire.'" And 'Ali (ع) made mention of those of his companions and of Mu'awiyah's companions who had been slain, and said, "Mu'awiyah and I shall be brought forth and shall dispute on the Day of Resurrection before the Lord of the Throne; and whichever of us prevails, his companions prevail."

Should the people of rebellion be summoned to obedience before the fighting, that is well; and 'Ali (ع) summoned the people of the Camel and the people of the Canal. But if they are not summoned, and they already know that to which they are being called, and the banner of guidance has been raised for them, then there is no blame upon whoever fights them before the summons. We have already related the word of 'Ali (ع) in this.

The people of rebellion are fought as the polytheists are fought, by every means by which it is possible to fight them. Whoever of their women and children takes part in the fighting is fought, and whoever of them does not fight is not killed. Whoever of them is slain, his heirs inherit from him, except for what he brought to the war against the people of justice, that is, what he carried out against them; for that, if it is seized, becomes booty, and is divided as it is divided among the polytheists, while their offspring and their women are free and are not enslaved. There is no harm in seeking aid against them from rebels of their own kind, or from the corrupt among the Muslims, or from the people of the covenant; and if these join the people of justice in war against the polytheists, they are given shares of the four-fifths of the booty, and this belongs to the Imam of the people of justice and not to the imam of the people of rebellion, and if he lays claim to it, he is fought over it.

As for the captives of the people of rebellion, the Imam may put them to death if he wishes, or show them favor, or ransom them, or take ransom for them; but their free persons are not enslaved. And whoever is taken of the slaves whom their masters brought out to the war is spoils. When they are routed, if they have no faction to which they may resort, they are left to scatter and are not pursued, and their wounded are not dispatched. Thus did 'Ali (ع) do when Talha and al-Zubayr were slain and 'A'ishah was surrounded, for they had no faction to which to resort; when they were routed, he commanded that it be called out among his companions, "Pursue no one who turns his back, kill no one who casts down his weapon, and dispatch no wounded man." But if they have a faction to which they may resort, then when they are routed they are pursued with the sword and heavily beset. So 'Ali (ع) commanded concerning the people of Syria on the day of Siffin, when Mu'awiyah's men were routed while Mu'awiyah still stood over them, that they be pursued with the sword and heavily beset, until they raised up the copies of the Qur'an. And among his companions there befell the failing that befell; for he was commanding them to pursue, and when he found from them nothing but what befell, and they refused to pursue once they were called to the Qur'an, that was the stratagem and the guile by which 'Amr ibn al-'As contrived for Mu'awiyah.

When the people of justice gain the upper hand over the people of rebellion, they restore whatever the rebels had cut off, and whatever was in their hands of what they had usurped, and whatever they had taken for themselves, and they give it and hand it over to the one to whom its return is due. Whatever was in the camp of the people of rebellion of their merchants, or their women, or their offspring, if these were with them, is booty, being among that which they brought out. But if they were in a city, then whatever of theirs was used to aid the war against the people of justice, or would be so used, or was brought out for it, is booty for the people of justice when they prevail over it; and the rule for dividing this is as the rule for the spoils taken from the polytheists. Whomever the people of justice slay of the people of rebellion in their wars, or in their night raids, or in their campaigns, so long as they remain people of rebellion, there is no liability upon the people of justice for it, nor for what they take of their spoils. And if they turn back and return to the truth and enter under the authority of the just Imam, then all of that which the people of justice took was taken by a right that was rightfully theirs, which Allah, Mighty and Majestic, permitted them and commanded them to take.

When rebels seize the property of the people of justice during their revolt, they are bound to restore it to its owners. If the one who took a particular thing is established and known, it is recovered from him, for he took it without right. If the taker cannot be identified, nothing remains but an oath sworn against the one who lays claim to it. And where a man of the people of justice has been slain and his killer is known, the kinsmen of the slain may take retaliation from that killer, for he killed him wrongfully. When they do this, that is the very reality of returning to obedience: repentance, and the clearing of oneself from wrongs.

As for what the rebels inflict upon one another, the judgment of the people of justice does not run between them. It is not examined at all, unless the one set in authority over them comes upon a particular matter in the ordinary course of his office; then he adjudicates it, if it is established.

Should the sound among the rebels sue for truce, the matter is laid before the people of justice, and their leader does what he judges best for himself and for the Muslims under his command, until such time as he is able to fight them. If he grants them a covenant, let him keep faith with it. If afterward he wishes to make war on them, he must first cast their covenant back to them, as was set out in the matter of a truce with the polytheists. He may not make peace with them on any terms that surrender the limits set by Allah or His sacred bounds, or that forfeit any right owed to Him, or that leave undone any duty the religion requires. Nor is a man of religion forbidden to kill his own father when his father is among the rebels, unless he fears him, or can find no way but to kill him himself; and if he finds another to undertake it in his place, he leaves it to that other. All of this is the united teaching of the Ahl al-Bayt (عليهم السلام).

As for those of the People of the Qibla who must be fought and, if need be, killed: whoever denies an obligation among the obligations of Islam, or withholds a due among its dues, has denied a duty binding upon him. He is to be fought, once he has taken up arms for that denial and refused to return to the truth. And whoever stands behind him or lends him aid is in his very position: he is fought and killed until he returns to the command of Allah.

As for brigands who fall upon people meaning to seize their wealth, those set upon may lawfully fight them and kill them in defense of their property and of anything unlawfully demanded of them, or of the Muslims and the covenanted people in their company. Yet fighting such men is not laid upon them as a binding obligation in the way that jihad is laid upon them. Abu Ja'far Muhammad ibn Ali (ع) was asked about a man killed in defense of his property. He answered that the Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "Whoever is killed defending his wealth is a martyr" (من قتل دون ماله فهو شهيد). Even so, were a man to let the wealth go and not fight for it because he feared that its defense would bring about his own ruin, that too is allowed, for to surrender wealth is easier than to court destruction. And whoever does stand firm has the reward of one who holds fast to the right, and is rightly guided and rewarded, because the Messenger of Allah (ص) named the one slain in that cause a martyr.

Ja'far ibn Muhammad (ع) related that a man came to Ali (ع) and said, "O Commander of the Faithful, a man entered upon my wife and stole her jewelry while I looked on, and I let him be, out of fear of him." Ali (ع) said, "But had it been Ali ibn Abi Talib, he would not have consented to that until he had risen against him with the sword." Whatever is taken by the hands of thieves, if its owner recognizes it, is returned to him; and whatever the owner cannot identify belongs to those who fought the thieves for it. The Messenger of Allah (ص) said, "The spoils of brigands are lawful" (سلب اللصوص حلال). The spy and the informer may be put to death by whatever means one has power over him. And if the Imam sees fit to imprison the brigand, or to make an example of him, or to punish him as he judges right, or to release him, that is his to do, until the man repents in prison.

The apostate stands in the position of a captive, even though he be one of the polytheists, and no covenant or grant of safety is accepted from him; if the Imam wishes to take him as a slave, he may. Whoever was born into Islam and then turns Jew or Christian or otherwise departs from Islam is put to death and is granted no term in which to repent, unless he repents before he is seized, according to the word of the Messenger of Allah (ص), "Whoever changes his religion, kill him" (من بدل دينه فاقتلوه), meaning one who turns away from Islam. But if a Jew becomes a Christian, or a Christian becomes a Jew, or a man passes from one form of unbelief into another like it, he is not molested for it, for unbelief is all one thing, a single creed; such a man is not called an apostate. The apostate is the one who leaves a religion and turns to its opposite. So when a polytheist enters Islam and then reverts to polytheism, his case is carried up to the ruler, who calls him to repent for three days; and if he has not repented by the third day, he is put to death. Thus did Ali (ع) deal with an apostate brought before him. And when apostates hold out together in refusal, they are fought as the polytheists are fought.

An apostate woman is imprisoned until she repents in her prison. An apostate bondwoman is beaten, and given no food but what sustains her in her confinement, and no clothing but what covers her nakedness; her owners are charged to set her to the hardest service until she repents or dies in that state, and she is not to be so imprisoned that her owners are cut off from the benefit of her.

If apostates, together with their women, refuse Islam and fortify themselves in a stronghold or a district, they are fought as the polytheists are fought; and if they are overcome and do not repent, their women and children are taken as captives. The women are compelled to Islam as apostate bondwomen are compelled. They are not to be given settled place or given in marriage, for it is not lawful to marry an apostate woman. And when the children among them reach the age of discernment, Islam is set before them, and their way is the way of the apostate women and men.

The heretics (zanadiqa) are put to death even if they repent, for they are given no term to repent, and after they are killed they are burned with fire. So did Ali (ع) deal with a party of people who were brought before him having gone to excess concerning him, alleging that he was a god, exalted be Allah far above what they claimed, there is no god but He. He questioned them, and they professed it; he called them to repent, and they persisted, saying, "If you kill us, you will bring us back to life." At this he was seized with a mighty anger. He commanded that a pit be dug, and it was dug for them, and a fire was kindled in it. He said, "Today I shall glut you with flesh and fat." Then he ordered his freedman Qanbar, who struck their necks, and he cast them into that pit and burned them in it. And looking upon what he had witnessed that day, he said, "لما رأيت اليوم أمراً منكراً، أضرمت ناراً ودعوت قنبراً" — When I beheld this day a thing most foul, I kindled a fire and I called upon Qanbar.
