...to the Imam of the time, and the da'wah of the Imam of the time is the da'wah of the Wasi. So, from this perspective, if you look, the da'wah of the Wasi is the da'wah of the divine religion, and there is no compulsion to enter it. La ikraha fi al-din (There is no compulsion in religion). This is the statement of Allah Ta'ala, and its explanation, that is, with the word 'yani' (meaning), is the ta'wil of the Holy Qur'an which Sayyidna Husayn Husamuddin stated. qad tabayyana al-rushdu min al-ghayy (the right course has become distinct from the wrong). Hidayah (guidance) has become clear from zalalah (misguidance). Meaning, the distinction between the station of the Wasi and the station of the Zidd has been established. fa man yakfur bi al-taghuti wa yu'min billahi... The station of the Zidd... who was the Zidd of the Wasi of the Prophet, Maulana Ali Salawatullah 'alayh, it has become known from them who is right and who is wrong. fa man yakfur bi al-taghuti wa yu'min billahi (So whoever disbelieves in Taghut and believes in Allah). The person who rejects the Taghut and brings iman (faith) in Allah... yani (meaning) the one who rejects the Zidd al-Awwal (the first opponent) and accepts the Wasi. Ji. fa qad istamsaka bi al-'urwati al-wuthqa (has grasped the most trustworthy handhold). So he has grasped the strong rope of Allah. Look, this, this is: he rejects the Zidd al-Awwal. As I have mentioned before, if one is to come to the da'wah of the Wasi, meaning to accept the wilayah of Amir al-Mu'minin, then one must also perform bara'ah (disassociation) from those who are against him. Until there is bara'ah, it cannot happen. It should be in the heart, whether it is expressed by the tongue or not. Meaning, in the era of taqiyah, it is not necessary. But the bara'ah should be from one's heart, that 'we do not accept them'. The Khalifah, the true janashin (successor) of the Prophet is Maulana Ali Salawatullah 'alayh, who was raised in Ghadir Khumm. So the meaning is that the one who was made [successor] in Ghadir Khumm is the true janashin. The one whom the people made is not the true janashin. And what happened at the time of the Prophet's passing, you all have heard in the majalis that at the Prophet's final moment, it became very difficult. Janab Ali and Janab Fatima were sitting beside him, and all the people were holding a committee, having a meeting there. At Saqifah, which is behind the Masjid al-Nabawi, there. That when the Prophet passes away, and the situation is such, what should we do now? Who will lead the prayer and who will be the leader? So all that meeting was happening, and in the midst of it, Janab Umar, who is the Khalifah Thani, he said to Abu Bakr Sahib, the Khalifah Awwal, that 'bring, extend your hand, I will give you my...' ...I do it. I give bay'ah (pledge of allegiance). And he agreed. And so, the Awwal (first one) became the Khalifah Awwal. He led the prayer and all these things happened. And at that time, Maulana Ali is sitting, with the Prophet. So this method is that if the father passes away, will the children stay with the father or with the treasury? This is what has happened in Islam. The meaning of which is that here, Janab Ali and Janab Fatima, he took his last breath on their faces, the Prophet Salawatullah 'alayh. And that too, we have very high things told to us in the haqa'iq, what kind of sughrat and huliyat were granted to you at that time. Yani (meaning) he will reject the Zidd al-Awwal and accept the Wasi... ...so he has grasped the strong rope of Allah. Now, the 'urwat al-wuthqa, we take it to mean Maulana Ali. Here, the ta'wil that is written, look at it. Yani (meaning)... Yani (meaning) with this, the ma'rifah (gnosis) of Fatima al-Zahra was obtained. And people at that time were deprived of your ma'rifah. Deprived. la infisama laha (with no break in it). Janab Fatima... Janab Fatima is that personality who, after the Prophet Salawatullah 'alayh and Ali, her rank comes. She is the Hujjat of... Abu... Maulana Abu Talib, and besides that, she is also the Hujjat of Maulana Ali. She is the Hujjat 'Usma. In this, it is told that, as I always say, that Mawla-e-Kainat is the remover of difficulties of both worlds. Mawla-e-Kainat is... the title of Janab Ali. And Sarwar-e-Kainat is what they call Janab... the Prophet. Mawla-e-Kainat is the remover of difficulties of both worlds, and the remover of difficulties of Mawla-e-Kainat is Fatima. Fatima is the one who used to remove the hardships of Maulana Ali. You, for your whole life, after marriage, the conditions you lived in and how you lived, the Prophet knew and Ali knows. The one who obtained the ma'rifah of Fatima al-Zahra, the bad-bakht (unfortunate) people are those who... are deprived of your ma'rifah. He says bad-qismat (ill-fated) people, they are deprived. la infisama laha (with no break in it). It will never break. Which one? Habl (rope). Yani (meaning) al-'urwat al-wuthqa, which is Hablullah al-Matin (the firm rope of Allah), it will never break. Yani (meaning)... Yani (meaning) Fatima is connected to the Wasi. Therefore, there is no possibility of them being cut or broken. Wallahu Sami'un 'Alim (And Allah is Hearing and Knowing). And Allah is the one who hears and knows. Yani (meaning) the Wasi hears the du'a (supplication) of the one who prays, and is aware of his people of... the people of wilayah. Ji. Allahu waliyyu alladhina amanu... Sami'un 'Alim, where, as I have mentioned before, the word Kabir comes, the word Basir comes, there, the reference is made to Allah, and Allah is the one about whom one becomes astonished, or about whom one is made to doubt. That is our Allah. And Allah comes from 'walah', as we read yesterday. Sami'un 'Alim means the one who hears and knows. Yani (meaning) the Wasi, he knows all his haqq walon (rightful followers), who is on the right path and in what manner. He is also the hearer of du'a and is also aware of the people of wilayah. Allahu waliyyu alladhina amanu yukhrijuhum min al-zulumati ila al-nur (Allah is the protector of those who have believed. He brings them out from darknesses into the light). Allah is the friend of the believers. He brings them out of darkness into the light. Yani (meaning) the Wasi is the wali (protector) of the believers. He brings them out of doubts and uncertainties into the light of clear explanation. wa alladhina kafaru awliya'uhum al-taghutu yukhrijunahum min al-nuri ila al-zulumati (And those who disbelieve - their allies are Taghut. They take them out of the light into darknesses). And the awliya' (allies) of the kafirs (disbelievers) are the Taghut. They take them out of the light into darkness. Yani (meaning) the friends of the deniers of the station of the Wasi are the Taghut. They are the leaders of misguidance. People... Taghut means the rebellious people. The rebellious people who, in that era, the names, if you read history, it will be known. There is Marwan, there is Abu Sufyan, there is Mu'awiyah, whoever they were, all of them were those people. They are the leaders of misguidance. They, from the ma'rifat-e-ilahi (divine gnosis)... ...they take them out from the light of ma'rifat-e-ilahi and pull them into the darkness of jahalat (ignorance). ula'ika ashabu al-nari hum fiha khalidun (Those are the companions of the Fire; they will abide eternally therein). Those people are the inhabitants of hell. They will remain in it forever. Yani (meaning) the ashab (companions) of the Zidd al-Awwal will first burn in the fire of shukuk (doubts), and then they will be cast into the eternal punishment of hell. Ji. This, the Ayat al-Kursi is now finished, at khalidun. Up to khalidun. After that, what is there is that there are du'aiyah kalimat (supplicatory words), that will come later. Now, after this, in the Holy Qur'an, wherever this 'tilka al-rusulu' has begun, there the incident of Janab Ibrahim has been narrated. The story of Ibrahim 'alayh al-salam. Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. alam tara ila alladhi hajja Ibrahima fi rabbihi (Have you not considered the one who argued with Abraham about his Lord)? Have you not seen this person who argued with Ibrahim about their Lord? Yani (meaning) that person who quarreled with Ibrahim about his wasi (successor). Because he himself was an aspirant for wasa'it... ...an aspirant for wasa'it, rather a claimant. an atahu Allahu al-mulk (because Allah had given him kingship). Because Allah had given him saltanat (kingdom). Yani (meaning) Nimrud. Nimrud was the king. Nimrud was the king and he was... this Nimrud, Fir'awn, they were great in their own places. They were kings and they were that. But where the rank of Musa is great, the rank of 'Isa is great, or whoever, Ibrahim's rank is great, at that time they did not accept. This is what has always happened. Yani (meaning) Nimrud... Yani (meaning) Nimrud, the Zidd of Ibrahim and Isma'il, whom Allah had blessed with a great apparent government. So he also became an aspirant, rather a claimant, for the authority of the batini (inner) da'wah. He had the zahiri (apparent) da'wah, and he thought that the da'wah-e-batin would also be with him. There is a lot of difference between the two. For three or four days I have been continuously saying that the tanzili stages are different, and the ta'wili ones are different. There is a difference between the two, zahir and batin. idh qala Ibrahimu rabbiya alladhi yuhyi wa yumitu (When Abraham said, "My Lord is the one who gives life and causes death,"). When Ibrahim said to him, 'My Lord is the one who gives life and causes death.' Yani (meaning), my Wasi has this power that he, with his ta'idi (supportive) strength, makes the dead of jahalat (ignorance) into an 'alim (knower). And by removing this ta'yid, he pushes them into the darkness of jahalat. qala ana uhyi wa umit (He said, "I give life and cause death."). He said, 'I too give life and cause death.' Yani (meaning), the Zidd of Isma'il, who was the Hujjat of Ibrahim's da'wah, said, 'What is the big deal in this? The work of granting ifadah (beneficence) and taking it away, I can do that too. Whomever I wish, I teach, and whomever I do not wish, I stop.' Ji. This, this the Zidd said. That is, ana uhyi wa umit. These are special verses and special phrases that came from the mouth of Janab Ibrahim, about how the argument with him took place. What happened in the time of Fir'awn was with Janab Musa. You all know that. Ifadah and sulb. Now look, what is the meaning of uhyi wa umit? To give ifadah is to give life. And to change from it, to take it away (salb kar lena), is the matter of stopping it. qala Ibrahimu fa inna Allaha ya'ti bi al-shamsi min al-mashriqi fa'ti biha min al-maghribi (Abraham said, "Indeed, Allah brings up the sun from the east, so bring it up from the west."). Ibrahim said, 'Allah brings out the sun from the east. You bring it out from the west and show me.' Yani (meaning), the Wasi, his Imamate... Imamate and... Imamate and his own... he gives the proof of the اشاره (indication) towards himself from this Hadd-e-'Alawi ruhani (spiritual higher limit) which helps the Hudud-e-jismani (physical limits). So, prove your claim by the ishara (indication) of this person who is the bab (gate) of this Hadd-e-'Alawi, who is called the mashriq (east). fa buhita alladhi kafara wa Allahu la yahdi al-qawma al-zalimin (So the disbeliever was overwhelmed [by astonishment], and Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people). So the kafir (disbeliever) was astonished and speechless. And Allah... When he said that he brings it out from the mashriq, Allah Ta'ala, you bring it out from the maghrib and show me. The sun never rises from the maghrib. And look at its explanations, wherever the reason has been given. That it is the statement of the Prophet that 300 years after me, the sun will rise from the maghrib. Now this is also a statement, and that is also a statement. If the meaning is not understood, the Qur'an Sharif is not understood. Here, the meaning is that that is... the reference is made to the Hudud-e-ruhani, the Hadd-e-'Alawi. The reference is made to the Hadd-e-'Alawi. And what is there? That the Prophet says that 300 years after me, the sun will rise from the maghrib. What does that mean? The sun never rises from the maghrib. It rises from the mashriq and sets in the maghrib. But what is the meaning there? That 300 years later, where the era of the Prophet passed and the... the count of the Du'at... yani (meaning) of the Imams began, from Maulana Hasan, the first hafta (week/cycle) passed, the second hafta passed, and at that time, who... Janab Mehdi, yani (meaning) the 'alam (world) of satr (concealment) that was, in it, Maulana Mehdi Salawatullah 'alayh, who is our 11th Imam. The 11th Imam. And after him is Maulana Qa'im. So what is the count like? That after Maulana Muhammad bin Isma'il, there were three masturin Imams. After three masturin, that is, eight, nine, ten. And the 11th Imam is our Maulana Mehdi Salawatullah 'alayh. Who came from Murakush (Morocco). So Murako, that is... they call it maghrib. The sun rose from the maghrib. Now people didn't understand this. The sun never rises from the maghrib. What is the statement of the Prophet, we don't know. What happened? We have its meanings explained that he came out from Murakush. He came to Mahdiyyah. From Murakush... after coming out from Murakush, he founded Mahdiyyah and after that, the da'wah moved forward. So there was an immediate announcement. And how did it happen? Just as the Prophet was called Mim-e-Awwala. Mim-e-Awwala is the person of Janab Prophet. This is Mim-e-Awsata. Who? Janab Mehdi. Hazarat Imam Mehdi. So the kafir was astonished and speechless, and Allah does not give hidayah (guidance) to the zalimin (wrongdoers). Yani (meaning) Sabiq-e-Tala did not show the right path to the deniers of His awliya' and those who usurp their rights. aw ka alladhi marra 'ala qaryatin wa hiya khawiyatun 'ala 'urushiha (Or [consider such an example] as the one who passed by a township which had fallen into ruin). Or like this person who passed by a town that was fallen on its roofs. According to some narrations, this person was Hazrat... Hazrat Armiya bin Harqiya, Armiya bin Harqiya Nabi. And according to some, Hazrat Uzayr bin Sarayah Nabi. These two are also prophets. The Armeni people who live there, in Armenia, it comes from this, Armiya. And 'Uzayr, who was 'Uzayr? A Nabi (prophet). He was a Nabi, and 'Uzayr's name, Janab... Allah has put it in the Holy Qur'an. When was it put? Before whom? 'Isa. Before 'Isa. Before 'Isa, after Musa. So this is Janab 'Uzayr. And what did Allah say? That those people... the verse that has come, perhaps it will come in this. That Allah... one servant, who is 'Uzayr, people wanted to make him their son, Allah's son. Who was doing this? Saint Paul. Saint Paul, who was the bishop of the Christians, and he was... corrupt. And he is... his relationship has been described, what he was to 'Isa, and so on. But we are not concerned with that. The point is that it was Saint Paul's wish that now, in the religion... the shari'ah of Musa that is going on, to bring a disturbance into it. And this happened, that he wanted to make Allah's son, 'Uzayr. But at that very time, Janab 'Isa arrived. And 'Isa Nabi is a very special prophet. He is called Ruhullah. And Janab 'Isa, he has the fifth rank. What is the fifth rank? Skeleton. That is, in the body, it is the rank of the bones. The rank of the bones. When 'Isa Masih came, the meaning we understand of Masih is that Masih Masih means the one who touched and brought the dead to life, and cured the blind. It would be something, a miracle is with every prophet. But what is the real thing? That Masih is from 'siyahat' (traveling). That he used to travel. He never stayed in one place. And he had no house at all, Janab 'Isa. And 'Isa Nabi is the one who spread the biggest religion, that is, Christianity. It was a very big religion before Islam. But what was his age? 32 years. A little less than 33 years. He passed away at 32. Now, in his youth, I mean, at the age of 32. You, he... used to do tabligh (preaching) to the people, used to do all this. So those who believed, believed, and those who didn't, didn't. You used to, from one place, put your clothes and things on your shoulder and keep going. And he said, from here to there, from there to here, you go. At that time, his followers said, 'O 'Isa, O Ruhullah, we all have houses and you have no house. We want you to have a house too. And we are your followers, so we want you to have a house. And where will you build it? You tell us.' So Janab 'Isa said, 'Alright, I will tell you tomorrow morning.' The next morning, he went and while walking, reached a place, on a hill. And the slope of the hill, he said, 'Build on this.' They became worried, that how will a house be built on this slope? He said, 'The condition of the world is also like this, it is a slope. What is the use of building a house on this? The house should be built there. In the hereafter.' This has been told. That Masih is from 'siyahat', and you, he... what were they? About 'Isa Masih, it has been told that you, in the place where you were, your father was Yusuf bin Habib al-Najjar, that was his name. Yusuf was the name. Yusuf bin Habib al-Najjar. His rank was less than Janab 'Isa. He was Janab 'Isa's father. And what happened was that Janab Maryam, who is given with the Ahl al-Bayt, with the prophets, that Hazrat Maryam, her son was 'Isa, and she wanted that now, my son has grown up, he should work somewhere. Become a craftsman. And at that time, the craftsmanship that existed, he wanted to do that work in his place. And just as you know what Adam 'alayh al-salam's profession was, after that Nuh 'alayh al-salam was a carpenter, Janab Prophet Ibrahim was a builder, and after that Musa was a... he used to graze goats and was a shepherd. And after that Janab 'Isa, what... what is this? Janab 'Isa, he... used to do the work of a dyer. So in one place, the dyers of that time... now its ta'wil is different. I am leaving the ta'wil, I will tell that. But the work of a dyer. So Janab Maryam placed him there. He stayed for two or four days, then left. Then another, he went to another place, left there. He wouldn't stay and work anywhere. So the mother was worried that the child doesn't stay and work anywhere. But he went to one place and started working and became an expert in the work of a dyer. In dyeing clothes. Now what is meant by clothes? Sibghatullah, you all know. This is... its ta'wil is different. But what happened? That one day his master, who had employed him, he said, 'Ya 'Isa, I am going to the neighboring village. You have an order for these clothes, and you dye them. Red, yellow, blue, there were seven or six colors that he told. And in that, you dye them all separately and keep them. I will come in four days.' When he came after four days, he saw that 'Isa 'alayh al-salam was just standing there. So he said, 'What did you do?' He said, 'In one dye pot, I put all the bundles of cloth.' So he got worried. He said, 'You ruined the whole thing. The order is ruined.' So Janab 'Isa said, 'What do you want?' He said, 'This... I want the red color.' So by the power of Allah, it became red. When you said it, it became red. Then he took out yellow, so yellow came out. Now when he started looking, every color was coming out. So at that time, he was astonished, the master, that 'I thought he was a craftsman, but he is a waliullah (friend of Allah). He is Allah's wali.' And he got worried. He became worried and the dyers of the surroundings, he called all of them. And said, 'Look, this boy whom I had kept, the young man, and I had given him this work. But he has... it's a strange... he is a waliullah. Whatever he says, happens.' So they all started to accept him too. And the dyers who were there, they were all Hudud. And he was also a Hadd. As soon as it was known that he is a waliullah, they all became his disciples. They are the 12 disciples who were with him at the Last Supper. The Hawariyyun, as they are called. So such miraculous events also happened with 'Isa. So here, it is the matter of Nimrud. And what is it? aw ka alladhi marra... Yani (meaning) that Da'i reached a village where the da'wah had ceased. Not a single Mumin remained there. Okay, this talk that was happening was about Janab 'Uzayr. About Janab 'Uzayr it is said, Allah says that those people wanted to make 'Uzayr a son. Yani (meaning) who? Saint Paul and the Christians. But when they saw that 'Isa's shari'ah has started, Musa's shari'ah is ending... ending. And there is... Janab 'Isa's shari'ah had such a great impact that immediately this Saint Paul entered it, came into Christianity. He came into Christianity and became a great bishop there. And after becoming that, he said that 'now I will come into this religion and make Allah's son.' Whom? 'Isa. So the trick of making 'Isa a son, all of it belongs to him. To Saint Paul. And in some narrations, what is it? That he makes 'Uzayr a son, or Armiya. Yani (meaning) that sahib reached a village... Yani (meaning) that sahib reached a village where the da'wah had ceased. Not a single Mumin remained there. It is a necessary thing that ifadah (beneficence) and istifadah (receiving beneficence) had ended. qala anna yuhyi hadhihi Allahu ba'da mawtiha (He said, "How will Allah bring this to life after its death?"). He said, 'How will Allah resurrect this town after its ruin?' Yani (meaning), how will the Imam of the time promote the withered da'wah again? fa amatahu Allahu mi'ata 'amin thumma ba'athahu (So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years; then He revived him). Then Allah himself made him dead for 100 years. Then he brought him back to life. Yani (meaning), the Imam of the time, from the 100 Hudud of Allah who are the 100 mamsul of 100 years, he cut off their connection. Then he joined the connection again and blessed them with ruhani (spiritual) help. As it has happened in different places. And later on, what are 100 years, what are 1000 years, they are all special durations. Just as I told about 300 years, so is... the companions of the cave. Now here, he has not gone into the details, he has explained the ta'wil, that the 100 who are mamsul, their connection was cut off. This does not mean 100 years, but it is about 100 mamsul. Then their connection was joined again, and they were blessed with spiritual help. qala kam labithta qala labithtu yawman aw ba'da yawm (He said, "How long have you remained?" He said, "I have remained a day or part of a day."). Allah asked, 'How long were you here?' He replied, 'One day or a part of a day.' Yani (meaning), the ma'addat-e-ta'id from me was suspended only for the duration of one Imam's qiyam (era), no, not even that, but only for a short period. qala bal labithta mi'ata 'amin fa unzur ila ta'amika wa sharabika lam yatasannah (He said, "Rather, you have remained one hundred years. Look at your food and your drink; it has not changed with time."). Allah said, 'Rather, you stayed here for a full 100 years. Look at your food and drink, they have not spoiled or rotted.' Yani (meaning), you are in ghaflah (heedlessness). The connection of 100 Hudud-e-Imam was cut off from you. Your test was tough. Look at the condition of your 'ilm-e-zahir (apparent knowledge) and 'ilm-e-batin (inner knowledge), that still no change has occurred in it. wa unzur ila himarika (and look at your donkey). And look at your donkey. Yani (meaning), their Zidd who was the opponent. wa li naj'alaka ayatan li al-nas (and We will make you a sign for the people). And so that We may make you a sign for the people. Yani (meaning), We may make you an Imam for the people attached to the religion. wa unzur ila al-'izami kayfa nunshizuha thumma naksuha lahma (And look at the bones - how We raise them and then We cover them with flesh.). And look at the bones, how We join them, then how We clothe them with flesh. Look, this is a special verse, that how Allah Ta'ala joins us. I will turn your body into dust, and after turning it to dust, I will breathe the soul into it and raise you up. So how? I will make bones in it. On the bones, I will clothe it with flesh. Wa kasawna al-'izama lahma (And We clothed the bones with flesh). And on that... what is the meaning? The shari'ah of Janab 'Isa is described as being the abode of bones. The fifth shari'ah that came into the world, Adam, Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa, 'Isa, and Janab 'Isa, which is the fifth shari'ah, and after that, the Prophet's is the sixth. So at the time of the sixth, the entire structure of the shari'ah was completed. That the bones were clothed with flesh. In the mother's womb, when the fifth month is complete, the skeleton is ready. In the sixth month, the bone and skin... er, flesh and skin are formed. In the seventh month, the soul is breathed in. What does 'breathing the soul' mean? The vegetative soul is in it, but the animal soul appears. When it comes out of the mother's womb. So how is it? It doesn't happen in the seventh month. The seventh month is of the moon, and of Khalq-e-Akhar (another creation). But very rarely, in the seventh month, they are born. After the seventh month, then Zuhal's (Saturn's) kingship happens, the effect of Zuhal is there. Zuhal's effect is always in the habit of freezing. And the thing is, in the eighth month, that child starts to freeze again. And that is why it is told to women that in the eighth month, be careful. The pregnancy that happens, in the eighth... because in the first month, I have told this many times before, that the first month belongs to Zuhal, the second to Mushtari (Jupiter), the third to Mirrikh (Mars), the fourth to Shams (Sun), all these are separate. The fourth is of Shams, meaning movement begins in it, the power of Shams. And the fifth month is of... Zuhra (Venus), and the sixth month is of... 'Atarid (Mercury). Now from here, look, that in the seventh month, when Qamar's (Moon's) kingship is there, the effect of Qamar is there, that is, Qamar and Shams, both are special luminaries. When in the child, that... the sensory perception is created. The vegetative soul is in it, but now, now if the child is born, comes out of the mother's body, then what will happen? It will live. But if the eighth month comes, which is rare in the seventh month, the eighth month, then again Zuhal's effect is there. And it wants to freeze again. In the first month also it did. If it didn't freeze in the first month, the sperm wouldn't have set. But here, after it has set, and movement has started, bones have formed, flesh has been put on, and after that if again it has the habit of freezing, then it will be ruined. After that, the ninth month belongs to whom? Mushtari. After Zuhal. And at that time, birth happens. We have it told that the ninth... there is a whole ta'wil of it, how the seventh month is, then the eighth month and in the ninth month, a person comes out. Then how we clothe them with flesh. Yani (meaning), those Hudud who were scattered and had gone here and there, how we gather them and establish the da'wah. And then how the teaching of ifadah and istifadah begins. Sometimes it also happens that, like today's era, the da'wah is spread in three jazirahs (islands/regions). Sometimes it also happens that when the era is of the final daur (cycle) or some such thing, then in one jazirah, the da'wah remains. Out of the 12 jazirahs, one. The da'wah shrinks so much that one... यानी (meaning) no mumin is visible. It is written, isn't it? that no mumin is visible. But Allah Ta'ala is the possessor of power. He, if He wills, then all of it, in which ifadah and istifadah and the nurturing of mumins happens. fa lamma tabayyana lahu qala a'lamu anna Allaha 'ala kulli shay'in qadir (And when it became clear to him, he said, "I know that Allah is over all things competent."). So when the reality became apparent to him... And look, this is also a thing, that the daur that is going on with us, in which the era of Sayyidna Husayn Husamuddin was such an era that all ifadah and istifadah were stopped. Sometimes it happens that it is stopped. He knows what time this is, the end of the Fath is going on. It is stopped. Because it is better than the 'aqidah (creed) getting corrupted that the thing be stopped. There should be no leakage. It is stopped. This is a favor upon Hindustan, yani (meaning) Hindustan and Pakistan, this Hind-Sind, that the ifadah is ongoing here. Otherwise, there, in Najran and in Yemen and in other places, all ifadah is stopped. So the one who teaches, I have spoken to them, they said, 'Our knowledge has rusted.' We cannot teach. There is no command. So when we can't read, what will we teach? This has become the situation. fa lamma tabayyana lahu... So when the reality became apparent to him, he said, 'I know that Allah has power over all things.' Yani (meaning), when he experienced it himself, he understood that my doubt was wrong. And he acknowledged that the Imam of the time is the master of power. This mentioned person, 'Aziz, is 'Uzayr bin Sarayah Nabi, whom Allah tested severely. wa idh qala Ibrahimu rabbi arini kayfa tuhyi al-mawta (And [mention] when Abraham said, "My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead."). And when Ibrahim requested, 'O my Lord, show me how you resurrect the dead.' Yani (meaning), he requested his Muqim, 'Tell me how the propagation of the da'wah is done, so that I may command my bab to act in the same way.' qala a wa lam tu'min qala bala wa lakin li yatma'inna qalbi (He said, "Have you not believed?" He said, "Yes, but [I ask] only that my heart may be satisfied."). Allah said, 'Do you not have iman (faith)?' He replied, 'I have iman, but I want this so that my heart may be at ease.' Yani (meaning)... Yani (meaning), have these stages not passed over you? Have you not been called to the da'wah? And through this, have you not become safe from doubts and uncertainties? So he replied, 'Yes, this is true, but now I want to satisfy my wasi with your method of teaching.' qala fa khudh arba'atan min al-tayri fa surhunna ilayka (He said, "Take four birds and commit them to yourself."). He said, 'Take four birds and tame them.' Yani (meaning), from your Hujjats, single out four and elevate them to the rank of 'uruf. thumma ij'al 'ala kulli jabalin minhunna juz'an thumma ud'uhunna ya'tinaka sa'ya (Then [after slaughtering them] put on each hill a portion of them; then call them - they will come [flying] to you in haste.). Then place a piece of them on every mountain. Then call them. Look, the incident is like this, that they will come running. Four of them will come running. Now, you cut up the birds, put four pieces, and place one piece on each mountain, and then call out. They themselves will come flying. What is the meaning of this? If this is the meaning that the world understands, which is explained in the Qur'an Sharif, then there is no meaning. It is not understood. Until its ta'wil is explained. Yani (meaning)... Yani (meaning), send them to different places and spread them out separately. Then command them to invite towards you. They will immediately say 'labbayk' (at your service) to your command. And will quickly be engaged in spreading your da'wah. wa a'lam anna Allaha 'Azizun Hakim (And know that Allah is Exalted in Might and Wise.). And know that Allah is All-Powerful, All-Wise. Yani (meaning), the Wasi has no nazir (equal) or mathil (peer), and is Hakim (wise) in his actions. mathalu alladhina yunfiquna amwalahum fi sabili Allahi ka mathali habbatin anbatat sab'a sanabila fi kulli sunbulatin mi'atu habbatin (The example of those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah is like a seed [of grain] which grows seven spikes; in each spike is a hundred grains.). Those who spend their wealth in the way of Allah, their example is like that of a grain which grows seven ears, and in each ear, there are a hundred grains. 'Baal' means the ears that come out of the wheat, that. Now you have heard the lesson of Hazrat Da'i, how there are benefits of Zakat. If you spend in the way of Allah, how much benefit there is. The meaning of Zakat is 'safai' (cleanliness). It comes from 'zakka'. So what is the meaning? And its, the meanings of Zakat are told to be very high. That Zakat is the rank after namaz (prayer). It is not fasting. Fasting comes later. Aqimu al-salata wa atu al-zakat (Establish prayer and give zakat). So, establish prayer and give Zakat. So Zakat is... for Janab Ali Salawatullah 'alayh, and Salat is for the Prophet. Meaning, follow the Prophet's shari'ah and 'Ali's ta'wil. Aqimu al-salata wa atu al-zakat. Zakat is a very special thing, that out of 40 rupees, take out one rupee. The wealth you have, to take out 1 for 40 from it, your wealth does not decrease. Rather, that 1 for 40 is Allah's right. If you do not give, your 39 are ruined. And if you give, then the 39 become pure. So this is the concept of Zakat. And Sayyidna Husayn... Isma'il bin Hiba, Allah Ta'ala says to him, he says that by giving this, your wealth does not decrease. And by not giving, there is no... it doesn't happen that your wealth increases. So the meaning of this is that wherever... and it has been told from your side that wherever there is loss for the mumineen in the dry land and the sea, it happens for this reason, that they do not give Zakat fully. They do not give it fully. They give, but less. And for that, the narration of Maulana Ja'far al-Sadiq that you heard just now, how an old woman comes and troubles a man. Suhayl was his name. And he... started to complain, came to Maulana Ja'far al-Sadiq and said, 'Look, an old woman comes to me at night, she scares me. And I am worried.' So a friend of mine said, that friend came and said that my friend has this thing. So Maulana Ja'far al-Sadiq said, 'Ask him, to whom does he give Zakat?' He asked. He said, 'I will ask tomorrow and tell.' The next day he came and asked. He said, 'I take out 1/40th. What do you do with the 1/40th?' He said, 'I take it out and distribute it with my own hands.' He said, 'This is the reason she troubles you.' That it should go up in the da'wah. It should go to the Imam of the time. If there is no Imam, then to the Da'i al-Mutlaq. If there is no Da'i, then to those who are great, it should reach there. From all places, it comes up, and then from up, it is distributed. Among whom? Eight people. The names of the eight people are all given. That how, they who are the great ones of the da'wah, they distribute it. So the names of all are given. That there is ibn sabil, 'amilin, and besides that, poor, needy, orphans, captives, and on whom a case is running, or understand, who are in such... difficulties, have committed a murder. To such people it is given. And besides that, one is also mu'allafat al-qulub. Mu'allafat al-qulub means to win over hearts. To win over their hearts, the great ones of the da'wah also send something to them. And it happens that in the Da'wah Sharif, in many places, such people who want to harm the da'wah, it is given to them so that they remain quiet, that is called mu'allafat al-qulub. Yani (meaning) those who try to establish the position of the Sahib-e-Haqq and are like the Natiq, in whose daur (era) there are seven Imams, and under each Imam, there are one hundred Hudud. Wallahu yuda'ifu li man yasha'u wa Allahu Wasi'un 'Alim (And Allah multiplies [His reward] for whom He wills. And Allah is all-Encompassing and Knowing.). And Allah, for whomever He wishes, increases. And Allah is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing. Yani (meaning) Sabiq-e-Tala, among these servants, whomever's ranks He wants to increase, He increases it according to their capacity and ability. And Sabiq-e-Tala has this power. And He also knows to whom more should be given. Bas. Sabiq-e-Tala is who? The dhat (essence) of 'Aql-e-Awwal. Sabiq-e-Tala is the dhat of 'Aql-e-Awwal. We, about Mubdi'-e-Tala, neither our thoughts go there, nor our eyes go there. So whatever is, it starts from 'Aql-e-Awwal. And between 'Aql-e-Awwal and Mubdi'-e-Tala, there is only one thing that is created, and that is the Kalimah. It is the Kalimah, that is, the Amr-e-Ilahi (Divine Command). And it is the hukm (command), that it comes out. So from 'Aql-e-Awwal, things emanate downwards, and in the 'alam-e-jismani (physical world), they reach the Natiq of the daur, who is the Prophet Salawatullah 'alayh. So from there, to whomever they wish, they give. And after Janab Prophet, it comes to Janab Wasi. After the Wasi, the Imams begin. So the Imam is the muhafiz-e-shari'at (guardian of the shari'ah). The real responsible one for the shari'ah is him. We are doing it according to our own capacity. But the real muhafiz is the person of Janab Imam. Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. [Du'a in Arabic] al-Fatiha.
