60       3. Linear Regression

        dence of an association between advertising expenditure and sales. If
        the evidence is weak, then one might argue that no money should be
        spent on advertising!
     2. How strong is the relationship between advertising budget and sales?
        Assuming that there is a relationship between advertising and sales,
        we would like to know the strength of this relationship. Does knowl-
        edge of the advertising budget provide a lot of information about
        product sales?
     3. Which media are associated with sales?
        Are all three media—TV, radio, and newspaper—associated with
        sales, or are just one or two of the media associated? To answer this
        question, we must find a way to separate out the individual contribu-
        tion of each medium to sales when we have spent money on all three
        media.
     4. How large is the association between each medium and sales?
        For every dollar spent on advertising in a particular medium, by
        what amount will sales increase? How accurately can we predict this
        amount of increase?
     5. How accurately can we predict future sales?
        For any given level of television, radio, or newspaper advertising, what
        is our prediction for sales, and what is the accuracy of this prediction?
     6. Is the relationship linear?
        If there is approximately a straight-line relationship between advertis-
        ing expenditure in the various media and sales, then linear regression
        is an appropriate tool. If not, then it may still be possible to trans-
        form the predictor or the response so that linear regression can be
        used.
     7. Is there synergy among the advertising media?
        Perhaps spending $50,000 on television advertising and $50,000 on ra-
        dio advertising is associated with higher sales than allocating $100,000
        to either television or radio individually. In marketing, this is known
        as a synergy eﬀect, while in statistics it is called an interaction eﬀect. synergy
                                                                                    interaction
It turns out that linear regression can be used to answer each of these
questions. We will first discuss all of these questions in a general context,
and then return to them in this specific context in Section 3.4.


3.1 Simple Linear Regression
Simple linear regression lives up to its name: it is a very straightforward
                                                                                    simple linear
                                                                                    regression
                                                   3.1 Simple Linear Regression   61

approach for predicting a quantitative response Y on the basis of a sin-
gle predictor variable X. It assumes that there is approximately a linear
relationship between X and Y . Mathematically, we can write this linear
relationship as
                              Y ≈ β0 + β1 X.                        (3.1)
You might read “≈” as “is approximately modeled as”. We will sometimes
describe (3.1) by saying that we are regressing Y on X (or Y onto X).
For example, X may represent TV advertising and Y may represent sales.
Then we can regress sales onto TV by fitting the model

                              sales ≈ β0 + β1 × TV.

  In Equation 3.1, β0 and β1 are two unknown constants that represent
the intercept and slope terms in the linear model. Together, β0 and β1 are
                                                                              intercept
known as the model coeﬃcients or parameters. Once we have used our
                                                                              slope
training data to produce estimates β̂0 and β̂1 for the model coeﬃcients, we
                                                                              coeﬃcient
can predict future sales on the basis of a particular value of TV advertising parameter
by computing
                                ŷ = β̂0 + β̂1 x,                       (3.2)
where ŷ indicates a prediction of Y on the basis of X = x. Here we use a
hat symbol, ˆ , to denote the estimated value for an unknown parameter
or coeﬃcient, or to denote the predicted value of the response.


3.1.1 Estimating the Coeﬃcients
In practice, β0 and β1 are unknown. So before we can use (3.1) to make
predictions, we must use data to estimate the coeﬃcients. Let

                         (x1 , y1 ), (x2 , y2 ), . . . , (xn , yn )

represent n observation pairs, each of which consists of a measurement
of X and a measurement of Y . In the Advertising example, this data
set consists of the TV advertising budget and product sales in n = 200
diﬀerent markets. (Recall that the data are displayed in Figure 2.1.) Our
goal is to obtain coeﬃcient estimates β̂0 and β̂1 such that the linear model
(3.1) fits the available data well—that is, so that yi ≈ β̂0 + β̂1 xi for i =
1, . . . , n. In other words, we want to find an intercept β̂0 and a slope β̂1 such
that the resulting line is as close as possible to the n = 200 data points.
There are a number of ways of measuring closeness. However, by far the
most common approach involves minimizing the least squares criterion,
                                                                                    least squares
and we take that approach in this chapter. Alternative approaches will be
considered in Chapter 6.
   Let ŷi = β̂0 + β̂1 xi be the prediction for Y based on the ith value of X.
Then ei = yi − ŷi represents the ith residual—this is the diﬀerence between
                                                                                       residual
62           3. Linear Regression



        25


        20



Sales
        15


        10


        5




                0         50          100         150            200        250         300

                                                  TV

FIGURE 3.1. For the Advertising data, the least squares fit for the regression
of sales onto TV is shown. The fit is found by minimizing the residual sum of
squares. Each grey line segment represents a residual. In this case a linear fit
captures the essence of the relationship, although it overestimates the trend in the
left of the plot.

the ith observed response value and the ith response value that is predicted
by our linear model. We define the residual sum of squares (RSS) as
                                                                                                residual sum
                               RSS = e21 + e22 + · · · + e2n ,                                  of squares

or equivalently as
  RSS = (y1 − β̂0 − β̂1 x1 )2 + (y2 − β̂0 − β̂1 x2 )2 + · · · + (yn − β̂0 − β̂1 xn )2 . (3.3)

The least squares approach chooses β̂0 and β̂1 to minimize the RSS. Using
some calculus, one can show that the minimizers are
                               )n
                                      (x − x̄)(yi − ȳ)
                        β̂1 = i=1 )n i              2
                                                        ,
                                      i=1 (xi − x̄)                    (3.4)
                        β̂0 = ȳ − β̂1 x̄,
              )  n                  )n
where ȳ ≡ n1 i=1 yi and x̄ ≡ n1 i=1 xi are the sample means. In other
words, (3.4) defines the least squares coeﬃcient estimates for simple linear
regression.
   Figure 3.1 displays the simple linear regression fit to the Advertising
data, where β̂0 = 7.03 and β̂1 = 0.0475. In other words, according to
this approximation, an additional $1,000 spent on TV advertising is asso-
ciated with selling approximately 47.5 additional units of the product. In
                                                                         3.1 Simple Linear Regression     63



                        3
                  2.5
       0.06



                                2.15
       0.05                            2.11
  β1                                      ●
                                                                       RSS

       0.04                                       2.2
                                                            2.3
                                                             2.5
       0.03
                                                        3

              5             6             7   8                    9
                                                                              β0             β1
                                         β0


FIGURE 3.2. Contour and three-dimensional plots of the RSS on the
Advertising data, using sales as the response and TV as the predictor. The
red dots correspond to the least squares estimates β̂0 and β̂1 , given by (3.4).

Figure 3.2, we have computed RSS for a number of values of β0 and β1 ,
using the advertising data with sales as the response and TV as the predic-
tor. In each plot, the red dot represents the pair of least squares estimates
(β̂0 , β̂1 ) given by (3.4). These values clearly minimize the RSS.


3.1.2 Assessing the Accuracy of the Coeﬃcient Estimates
Recall from (2.1) that we assume that the true relationship between X and
Y takes the form Y = f (X) + ϵ for some unknown function f , where ϵ
is a mean-zero random error term. If f is to be approximated by a linear
function, then we can write this relationship as

                                              Y = β0 + β1 X + ϵ.                                        (3.5)

Here β0 is the intercept term—that is, the expected value of Y when X = 0,
and β1 is the slope—the average increase in Y associated with a one-unit
increase in X. The error term is a catch-all for what we miss with this
simple model: the true relationship is probably not linear, there may be
other variables that cause variation in Y , and there may be measurement
error. We typically assume that the error term is independent of X.
   The model given by (3.5) defines the population regression line, which
                                                                             population
is the best linear approximation to the true relationship between X and regression
Y .1 The least squares regression coeﬃcient estimates (3.4) characterize the line
least squares line (3.2). The left-hand panel of Figure 3.3 displays these
                                                                                                                least squares
                                                                                                                line
  1 The assumption of linearity is often a useful working model. However, despite what

many textbooks might tell us, we seldom believe that the true relationship is linear.
64         3. Linear Regression




     10                                          10


     5                                           5

Y                                            Y
     0                                           0


     −5                                          −5


     −10                                         −10

           −2    −1     0         1      2             −2   −1   0       1      2

                         X                                        X

FIGURE 3.3. A simulated data set. Left: The red line represents the true rela-
tionship, f (X) = 2 + 3X, which is known as the population regression line. The
blue line is the least squares line; it is the least squares estimate for f (X) based
on the observed data, shown in black. Right: The population regression line is
again shown in red, and the least squares line in dark blue. In light blue, ten least
squares lines are shown, each computed on the basis of a separate random set of
observations. Each least squares line is diﬀerent, but on average, the least squares
lines are quite close to the population regression line.

two lines in a simple simulated example. We created 100 random Xs, and
generated 100 corresponding Y s from the model
                                      Y = 2 + 3X + ϵ,                          (3.6)
where ϵ was generated from a normal distribution with mean zero. The
red line in the left-hand panel of Figure 3.3 displays the true relationship,
f (X) = 2 + 3X, while the blue line is the least squares estimate based
on the observed data. The true relationship is generally not known for
real data, but the least squares line can always be computed using the
coeﬃcient estimates given in (3.4). In other words, in real applications,
we have access to a set of observations from which we can compute the
least squares line; however, the population regression line is unobserved.
In the right-hand panel of Figure 3.3 we have generated ten diﬀerent data
sets from the model given by (3.6) and plotted the corresponding ten least
squares lines. Notice that diﬀerent data sets generated from the same true
model result in slightly diﬀerent least squares lines, but the unobserved
population regression line does not change.
   At first glance, the diﬀerence between the population regression line and
the least squares line may seem subtle and confusing. We only have one
data set, and so what does it mean that two diﬀerent lines describe the
relationship between the predictor and the response? Fundamentally, the
concept of these two lines is a natural extension of the standard statistical
                                               3.1 Simple Linear Regression     65

approach of using information from a sample to estimate characteristics of a
large population. For example, suppose that we are interested in knowing
the population mean µ of some random variable Y . Unfortunately, µ is
unknown, but we do have access to n observations from Y , y1 , . . . , yn ,
which )we can use to estimate µ. A reasonable estimate is µ̂ = ȳ, where
          n
ȳ = n1 i=1 yi is the sample mean. The sample mean and the population
mean are diﬀerent, but in general the sample mean will provide a good
estimate of the population mean. In the same way, the unknown coeﬃcients
β0 and β1 in linear regression define the population regression line. We seek
to estimate these unknown coeﬃcients using β̂0 and β̂1 given in (3.4). These
coeﬃcient estimates define the least squares line.
   The analogy between linear regression and estimation of the mean of a
random variable is an apt one based on the concept of bias. If we use the
                                                                                   bias
sample mean µ̂ to estimate µ, this estimate is unbiased, in the sense that
                                                                                   unbiased
on average, we expect µ̂ to equal µ. What exactly does this mean? It means
that on the basis of one particular set of observations y1 , . . . , yn , µ̂ might
overestimate µ, and on the basis of another set of observations, µ̂ might
underestimate µ. But if we could average a huge number of estimates of
µ obtained from a huge number of sets of observations, then this average
would exactly equal µ. Hence, an unbiased estimator does not systematically
over- or under-estimate the true parameter. The property of unbiasedness
holds for the least squares coeﬃcient estimates given by (3.4) as well: if
we estimate β0 and β1 on the basis of a particular data set, then our
estimates won’t be exactly equal to β0 and β1 . But if we could average
the estimates obtained over a huge number of data sets, then the average
of these estimates would be spot on! In fact, we can see from the right-
hand panel of Figure 3.3 that the average of many least squares lines, each
estimated from a separate data set, is pretty close to the true population
regression line.
   We continue the analogy with the estimation of the population mean
µ of a random variable Y . A natural question is as follows: how accurate
is the sample mean µ̂ as an estimate of µ? We have established that the
average of µ̂’s over many data sets will be very close to µ, but that a
single estimate µ̂ may be a substantial underestimate or overestimate of µ.
How far oﬀ will that single estimate of µ̂ be? In general, we answer this
question by computing the standard error of µ̂, written as SE(µ̂). We have
                                                                                   standard
the well-known formula                                                             error
                                               2    σ2
                            Var(µ̂) = SE(µ̂) =         ,                      (3.7)
                                                    n
where σ is the standard deviation of each of the realizations yi of Y .2
Roughly speaking, the standard error tells us the average amount that this
estimate µ̂ diﬀers from the actual value of µ. Equation 3.7 also tells us how

  2 This formula holds provided that the n observations are uncorrelated.
66      3. Linear Regression

this deviation shrinks with n—the more observations we have, the smaller
the standard error of µ̂. In a similar vein, we can wonder how close β̂0
and β̂1 are to the true values β0 and β1 . To compute the standard errors
associated with β̂0 and β̂1 , we use the following formulas:
                 3                       4
          2        1          x̄2                       2          σ2
  SE(β̂0 ) = σ 2     + )n              2
                                           , SE( β̂ 1 )   = ) n             2
                                                                              , (3.8)
                   n     i=1 (xi − x̄)                        i=1 (xi − x̄)

where σ 2 = Var(ϵ). For these formulas to be strictly valid, we need to
assume that the errors ϵi for each observation have common variance σ 2 and
are uncorrelated. This is clearly not true in Figure 3.1, but the formula still
turns out to be a good approximation. Notice in the formula that SE(β̂1 ) is
smaller when the xi are more spread out; intuitively we have more leverage
to estimate a slope when this is the case. We also see that SE(β̂0 ) would be
the same as SE(µ̂) if x̄ were zero (in which case β̂0 would be equal to ȳ). In
general, σ 2 is not known, but can be estimated from the data. This estimate
of σ is known
         5       as the residual standard error, and is given by the formula
                                                                                residual
RSE = RSS/(n − 2). Strictly speaking, when σ 2 is estimated from the standard
data we should write 6  SE(β̂1 ) to indicate that an estimate has been made, error
but for simplicity of notation we will drop this extra “hat”.
   Standard errors can be used to compute confidence intervals. A 95 %
                                                                                confidence
confidence interval is defined as a range of values such that with 95 % interval
probability, the range will contain the true unknown value of the param-
eter. The range is defined in terms of lower and upper limits computed
from the sample of data. A 95% confidence interval has the following prop-
erty: if we take repeated samples and construct the confidence interval for
each sample, 95% of the intervals will contain the true unknown value of
the parameter. For linear regression, the 95 % confidence interval for β1
approximately takes the form
                                    β̂1 ± 2 · SE(β̂1 ).                              (3.9)
That is, there is approximately a 95 % chance that the interval
                     7                                        8
                       β̂1 − 2 · SE(β̂1 ), β̂1 + 2 · SE(β̂1 )                      (3.10)

will contain the true value of β1 .3 Similarly, a confidence interval for β0
approximately takes the form
                                    β̂0 ± 2 · SE(β̂0 ).                            (3.11)

   3 Approximately for several reasons. Equation 3.10 relies on the assumption that the

errors are Gaussian. Also, the factor of 2 in front of the SE(β̂1 ) term will vary slightly
depending on the number of observations n in the linear regression. To be precise, rather
than the number 2, (3.10) should contain the 97.5 % quantile of a t-distribution with
n−2 degrees of freedom. Details of how to compute the 95 % confidence interval precisely
in R will be provided later in this chapter.
                                             3.1 Simple Linear Regression       67

   In the case of the advertising data, the 95 % confidence interval for β0
is [6.130, 7.935] and the 95 % confidence interval for β1 is [0.042, 0.053].
Therefore, we can conclude that in the absence of any advertising, sales will,
on average, fall somewhere between 6,130 and 7,935 units. Furthermore,
for each $1,000 increase in television advertising, there will be an average
increase in sales of between 42 and 53 units.
   Standard errors can also be used to perform hypothesis tests on the
                                                                               hypothesis
coeﬃcients. The most common hypothesis test involves testing the null test
hypothesis of
                                                                                     null
                                                                                     hypothesis
              H0 : There is no relationship between X and Y                 (3.12)

versus the alternative hypothesis
                                                                                     alternative
                                                                                     hypothesis
             Ha : There is some relationship between X and Y .              (3.13)

Mathematically, this corresponds to testing

                                  H0 : β 1 = 0

versus
                                  Ha : β1 ̸= 0,
since if β1 = 0 then the model (3.5) reduces to Y = β0 + ϵ, and X is
not associated with Y . To test the null hypothesis, we need to determine
whether β̂1 , our estimate for β1 , is suﬃciently far from zero that we can
be confident that β1 is non-zero. How far is far enough? This of course
depends on the accuracy of β̂1 —that is, it depends on SE(β̂1 ). If SE(β̂1 ) is
small, then even relatively small values of β̂1 may provide strong evidence
that β1 ̸= 0, and hence that there is a relationship between X and Y . In
contrast, if SE(β̂1 ) is large, then β̂1 must be large in absolute value in order
for us to reject the null hypothesis. In practice, we compute a t-statistic,
                                                                                  t-statistic
given by
                                         β̂1 − 0
                                    t=            ,                        (3.14)
                                         SE(β̂1 )
which measures the number of standard deviations that β̂1 is away from 0. If
there really is no relationship between X and Y , then we expect that (3.14)
will have a t-distribution with n − 2 degrees of freedom. The t-distribution
has a bell shape and for values of n greater than approximately 30 it is
quite similar to the standard normal distribution. Consequently, it is a
simple matter to compute the probability of observing any number equal
to |t| or larger in absolute value, assuming β1 = 0. We call this probability
the p-value. Roughly speaking, we interpret the p-value as follows: a small
                                                                                p-value
p-value indicates that it is unlikely to observe such a substantial association
between the predictor and the response due to chance, in the absence of
any real association between the predictor and the response. Hence, if we
68        3. Linear Regression

                          Coeﬃcient       Std. error     t-statistic     p-value
          Intercept          7.0325          0.4578           15.36     < 0.0001
          TV                 0.0475          0.0027           17.67     < 0.0001
TABLE 3.1. For the Advertising data, coeﬃcients of the least squares model
for the regression of number of units sold on TV advertising budget. An increase
of $1,000 in the TV advertising budget is associated with an increase in sales by
around 50 units. (Recall that the sales variable is in thousands of units, and the
TV variable is in thousands of dollars.)

see a small p-value, then we can infer that there is an association between
the predictor and the response. We reject the null hypothesis—that is, we
declare a relationship to exist between X and Y —if the p-value is small
enough. Typical p-value cutoﬀs for rejecting the null hypothesis are 5% or
1%, although this topic will be explored in much greater detail in Chap-
ter 13. When n = 30, these correspond to t-statistics (3.14) of around 2
and 2.75, respectively.
  Table 3.1 provides details of the least squares model for the regression of
number of units sold on TV advertising budget for the Advertising data.
Notice that the coeﬃcients for β̂0 and β̂1 are very large relative to their
standard errors, so the t-statistics are also large; the probabilities of seeing
such values if H0 is true are virtually zero. Hence we can conclude that
β0 ̸= 0 and β1 ̸= 0.4


3.1.3 Assessing the Accuracy of the Model
Once we have rejected the null hypothesis (3.12) in favor of the alternative
hypothesis (3.13), it is natural to want to quantify the extent to which the
model fits the data. The quality of a linear regression fit is typically assessed
using two related quantities: the residual standard error (RSE) and the R2 2
                                                                                  R
statistic.
                                        2
  Table 3.2 displays the RSE, the R statistic, and the F -statistic (to be
described in Section 3.2.2) for the linear regression of number of units sold
on TV advertising budget.

Residual Standard Error
Recall from the model (3.5) that associated with each observation is an
error term ϵ. Due to the presence of these error terms, even if we knew the
true regression line (i.e. even if β0 and β1 were known), we would not be

     4 In Table 3.1, a small p-value for the intercept indicates that we can reject the null

hypothesis that β0 = 0, and a small p-value for TV indicates that we can reject the null
hypothesis that β1 = 0. Rejecting the latter null hypothesis allows us to conclude that
there is a relationship between TV and sales. Rejecting the former allows us to conclude
that in the absence of TV expenditure, sales are non-zero.
                                               3.1 Simple Linear Regression      69

                      Quantity                             Value
                      Residual standard error              3.26
                      R2                                   0.612
                      F -statistic                         312.1
TABLE 3.2. For the Advertising data, more information about the least squares
model for the regression of number of units sold on TV advertising budget.

able to perfectly predict Y from X. The RSE is an estimate of the standard
deviation of ϵ. Roughly speaking, it is the average amount that the response
will deviate from the true regression line. It is computed using the formula
                                        :
                       9                ;          n
                            1           ; 1 0
                RSE =          RSS =    <            (yi − ŷi )2 .    (3.15)
                          n−2              n − 2 i=1

Note that RSS was defined in Section 3.1.1, and is given by the formula
                                    n
                                    0
                            RSS =         (yi − ŷi )2 .                      (3.16)
                                    i=1

   In the case of the advertising data, we see from the linear regression
output in Table 3.2 that the RSE is 3.26. In other words, actual sales in
each market deviate from the true regression line by approximately 3,260
units, on average. Another way to think about this is that even if the
model were correct and the true values of the unknown coeﬃcients β0
and β1 were known exactly, any prediction of sales on the basis of TV
advertising would still be oﬀ by about 3,260 units on average. Of course,
whether or not 3,260 units is an acceptable prediction error depends on the
problem context. In the advertising data set, the mean value of sales over
all markets is approximately 14,000 units, and so the percentage error is
3,260/14,000 = 23 %.
   The RSE is considered a measure of the lack of fit of the model (3.5) to
the data. If the predictions obtained using the model are very close to the
true outcome values—that is, if ŷi ≈ yi for i = 1, . . . , n—then (3.15) will
be small, and we can conclude that the model fits the data very well. On
the other hand, if ŷi is very far from yi for one or more observations, then
the RSE may be quite large, indicating that the model doesn’t fit the data
well.

R2 Statistic
The RSE provides an absolute measure of lack of fit of the model (3.5)
to the data. But since it is measured in the units of Y , it is not always
clear what constitutes a good RSE. The R2 statistic provides an alternative
measure of fit. It takes the form of a proportion—the proportion of variance
70        3. Linear Regression

explained—and so it always takes on a value between 0 and 1, and is
independent of the scale of Y .
  To calculate R2 , we use the formula
                               TSS − RSS            RSS
                            R2 =             =1−                        (3.17)
                                   TSS              TSS
                )
where TSS = (yi − ȳ)2 is the total sum of squares, and RSS is defined
                                                                               total sum of
in (3.16). TSS measures the total variance in the response Y , and can be squares
thought of as the amount of variability inherent in the response before the
regression is performed. In contrast, RSS measures the amount of variability
that is left unexplained after performing the regression. Hence, TSS − RSS
measures the amount of variability in the response that is explained (or
removed) by performing the regression, and R2 measures the proportion of
variability in Y that can be explained using X. An R2 statistic that is close
to 1 indicates that a large proportion of the variability in the response is
explained by the regression. A number near 0 indicates that the regression
does not explain much of the variability in the response; this might occur
because the linear model is wrong, or the error variance σ 2 is high, or both.
In Table 3.2, the R2 was 0.61, and so just under two-thirds of the variability
in sales is explained by a linear regression on TV.
   The R2 statistic (3.17) has an interpretational advantage over the RSE
(3.15), since unlike the RSE, it always lies between 0 and 1. However, it can
still be challenging to determine what is a good R2 value, and in general,
this will depend on the application. For instance, in certain problems in
physics, we may know that the data truly comes from a linear model with
a small residual error. In this case, we would expect to see an R2 value that
is extremely close to 1, and a substantially smaller R2 value might indicate a
serious problem with the experiment in which the data were generated. On
the other hand, in typical applications in biology, psychology, marketing,
and other domains, the linear model (3.5) is at best an extremely rough
approximation to the data, and residual errors due to other unmeasured
factors are often very large. In this setting, we would expect only a very
small proportion of the variance in the response to be explained by the
predictor, and an R2 value well below 0.1 might be more realistic!
   The R2 statistic is a measure of the linear relationship between X and
Y . Recall that correlation, defined as
                                    )n                                         correlation
                                       i=1 (xi − x)(yi − y)
               Cor(X, Y ) = 5)n                  5) n               ,   (3.18)
                                               2                  2
                                  i=1 (xi − x)       i=1 (yi − y)

is also a measure of the linear relationship between X and Y .5 This sug-
gests that we might be able to use r = Cor(X, Y ) instead of R2 in order to

     5 We note that in fact, the right-hand side of (3.18) is the sample correlation; thus,

                                    !Y ); however, we omit the “hat” for ease of
it would be more correct to write Cor(X,
notation.
                                            3.2 Multiple Linear Regression      71

assess the fit of the linear model. In fact, it can be shown that in the simple
linear regression setting, R2 = r2 . In other words, the squared correlation
and the R2 statistic are identical. However, in the next section we will
discuss the multiple linear regression problem, in which we use several pre-
dictors simultaneously to predict the response. The concept of correlation
between the predictors and the response does not extend automatically to
this setting, since correlation quantifies the association between a single
pair of variables rather than between a larger number of variables. We will
see that R2 fills this role.


3.2 Multiple Linear Regression
Simple linear regression is a useful approach for predicting a response on the
basis of a single predictor variable. However, in practice we often have more
than one predictor. For example, in the Advertising data, we have examined
the relationship between sales and TV advertising. We also have data for
the amount of money spent advertising on the radio and in newspapers,
and we may want to know whether either of these two media is associated
with sales. How can we extend our analysis of the advertising data in order
to accommodate these two additional predictors?
   One option is to run three separate simple linear regressions, each of
which uses a diﬀerent advertising medium as a predictor. For instance,
we can fit a simple linear regression to predict sales on the basis of the
amount spent on radio advertisements. Results are shown in Table 3.3 (top
table). We find that a $1,000 increase in spending on radio advertising is
associated with an increase in sales of around 203 units. Table 3.3 (bottom
table) contains the least squares coeﬃcients for a simple linear regression of
sales onto newspaper advertising budget. A $1,000 increase in newspaper
advertising budget is associated with an increase in sales of approximately
55 units.
   However, the approach of fitting a separate simple linear regression model
for each predictor is not entirely satisfactory. First of all, it is unclear how to
make a single prediction of sales given the three advertising media budgets,
since each of the budgets is associated with a separate regression equation.
Second, each of the three regression equations ignores the other two media
in forming estimates for the regression coeﬃcients. We will see shortly that
if the media budgets are correlated with each other in the 200 markets
in our data set, then this can lead to very misleading estimates of the
association between each media budget and sales.
   Instead of fitting a separate simple linear regression model for each pre-
dictor, a better approach is to extend the simple linear regression model
(3.5) so that it can directly accommodate multiple predictors. We can do
this by giving each predictor a separate slope coeﬃcient in a single model.
In general, suppose that we have p distinct predictors. Then the multiple
72     3. Linear Regression

                      Simple regression of sales on radio
                       Coeﬃcient Std. error t-statistic                  p-value

        Intercept             9.312             0.563         16.54      < 0.0001
        radio                 0.203             0.020          9.92      < 0.0001

                    Simple regression of sales on newspaper

                      Coeﬃcient             Std. error   t-statistic     p-value

        Intercept            12.351             0.621         19.88      < 0.0001
        newspaper             0.055             0.017          3.30      0.00115
TABLE 3.3. More simple linear regression models for the Advertising data. Co-
eﬃcients of the simple linear regression model for number of units sold on Top:
radio advertising budget and Bottom: newspaper advertising budget. A $1,000 in-
crease in spending on radio advertising is associated with an average increase in
sales by around 203 units, while the same increase in spending on newspaper ad-
vertising is associated with an average increase in sales by around 55 units. (Note
that the sales variable is in thousands of units, and the radio and newspaper
variables are in thousands of dollars.)

linear regression model takes the form
                  Y = β0 + β1 X1 + β2 X2 + · · · + βp Xp + ϵ,                       (3.19)
where Xj represents the jth predictor and βj quantifies the association
between that variable and the response. We interpret βj as the average
eﬀect on Y of a one unit increase in Xj , holding all other predictors fixed.
In the advertising example, (3.19) becomes
      sales = β0 + β1 × TV + β2 × radio + β3 × newspaper + ϵ.                       (3.20)

3.2.1 Estimating the Regression Coeﬃcients
As was the case in the simple linear regression setting, the regression coef-
ficients β0 , β1 , . . . , βp in (3.19) are unknown, and must be estimated. Given
estimates β̂0 , β̂1 , . . . , β̂p , we can make predictions using the formula
                      ŷ = β̂0 + β̂1 x1 + β̂2 x2 + · · · + β̂p xp .                 (3.21)
  The parameters are estimated using the same least squares approach that
we saw in the context of simple linear regression. We choose β0 , β1 , . . . , βp
to minimize the sum of squared residuals
                       n
                       0
           RSS    =          (yi − ŷi )2
                       i=1
                       n
                       0
                  =          (yi − β̂0 − β̂1 xi1 − β̂2 xi2 − · · · − β̂p xip )2 .   (3.22)
                       i=1
                                             3.2 Multiple Linear Regression        73


               Y




                                                       X2




                                                       X1

FIGURE 3.4. In a three-dimensional setting, with two predictors and one re-
sponse, the least squares regression line becomes a plane. The plane is chosen
to minimize the sum of the squared vertical distances between each observation
(shown in red) and the plane.


The values β̂0 , β̂1 , . . . , β̂p that minimize (3.22) are the multiple least squares
regression coeﬃcient estimates. Unlike the simple linear regression esti-
mates given in (3.4), the multiple regression coeﬃcient estimates have
somewhat complicated forms that are most easily represented using ma-
trix algebra. For this reason, we do not provide them here. Any statistical
software package can be used to compute these coeﬃcient estimates, and
later in this chapter we will show how this can be done in R. Figure 3.4
illustrates an example of the least squares fit to a toy data set with p = 2
predictors.
   Table 3.4 displays the multiple regression coeﬃcient estimates when TV,
radio, and newspaper advertising budgets are used to predict product sales
using the Advertising data. We interpret these results as follows: for a given
amount of TV and newspaper advertising, spending an additional $1,000 on
radio advertising is associated with approximately 189 units of additional
sales. Comparing these coeﬃcient estimates to those displayed in Tables 3.1
and 3.3, we notice that the multiple regression coeﬃcient estimates for
TV and radio are pretty similar to the simple linear regression coeﬃcient
estimates. However, while the newspaper regression coeﬃcient estimate in
Table 3.3 was significantly non-zero, the coeﬃcient estimate for newspaper
74     3. Linear Regression

in the multiple regression model is close to zero, and the corresponding p-
value is no longer significant, with a value around 0.86. This illustrates that
the simple and multiple regression coeﬃcients can be quite diﬀerent. This
diﬀerence stems from the fact that in the simple regression case, the slope
term represents the average increase in product sales associated with a
$1,000 increase in newspaper advertising, ignoring other predictors such as
TV and radio. By contrast, in the multiple regression setting, the coeﬃcient
for newspaper represents the average increase in product sales associated
with increasing newspaper spending by $1,000 while holding TV and radio
fixed.

                     Coeﬃcient     Std. error   t-statistic    p-value
       Intercept         2.939        0.3119          9.42    < 0.0001
       TV                0.046        0.0014         32.81    < 0.0001
       radio             0.189        0.0086         21.89    < 0.0001
       newspaper        −0.001        0.0059        −0.18       0.8599
TABLE 3.4. For the Advertising data, least squares coeﬃcient estimates of the
multiple linear regression of number of units sold on TV, radio, and newspaper
advertising budgets.


   Does it make sense for the multiple regression to suggest no relationship
between sales and newspaper while the simple linear regression implies the
opposite? In fact it does. Consider the correlation matrix for the three
predictor variables and response variable, displayed in Table 3.5. Notice
that the correlation between radio and newspaper is 0.35. This indicates
that markets with high newspaper advertising tend to also have high ra-
dio advertising. Now suppose that the multiple regression is correct and
newspaper advertising is not associated with sales, but radio advertising
is associated with sales. Then in markets where we spend more on radio
our sales will tend to be higher, and as our correlation matrix shows, we
also tend to spend more on newspaper advertising in those same mar-
kets. Hence, in a simple linear regression which only examines sales versus
newspaper, we will observe that higher values of newspaper tend to be as-
sociated with higher values of sales, even though newspaper advertising is
not directly associated with sales. So newspaper advertising is a surrogate
for radio advertising; newspaper gets “credit” for the association between
radio on sales.
   This slightly counterintuitive result is very common in many real life
situations. Consider an absurd example to illustrate the point. Running
a regression of shark attacks versus ice cream sales for data collected at
a given beach community over a period of time would show a positive
relationship, similar to that seen between sales and newspaper. Of course
no one has (yet) suggested that ice creams should be banned at beaches
to reduce shark attacks. In reality, higher temperatures cause more people
                                          3.2 Multiple Linear Regression     75

                            TV      radio     newspaper     sales
            TV            1.0000    0.0548     0.0567      0.7822
            radio                   1.0000     0.3541      0.5762
            newspaper                          1.0000      0.2283
            sales                                          1.0000
TABLE 3.5. Correlation matrix for TV, radio, newspaper, and sales for the
Advertising data.

to visit the beach, which in turn results in more ice cream sales and more
shark attacks. A multiple regression of shark attacks onto ice cream sales
and temperature reveals that, as intuition implies, ice cream sales is no
longer a significant predictor after adjusting for temperature.


3.2.2 Some Important Questions
When we perform multiple linear regression, we usually are interested in
answering a few important questions.

  1. Is at least one of the predictors X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp useful in predicting
     the response?

  2. Do all the predictors help to explain Y , or is only a subset of the
     predictors useful?

  3. How well does the model fit the data?

  4. Given a set of predictor values, what response value should we predict,
     and how accurate is our prediction?

We now address each of these questions in turn.

One: Is There a Relationship Between the Response and Predictors?
Recall that in the simple linear regression setting, in order to determine
whether there is a relationship between the response and the predictor we
can simply check whether β1 = 0. In the multiple regression setting with p
predictors, we need to ask whether all of the regression coeﬃcients are zero,
i.e. whether β1 = β2 = · · · = βp = 0. As in the simple linear regression
setting, we use a hypothesis test to answer this question. We test the null
hypothesis,
                        H0 : β 1 = β 2 = · · · = β p = 0
versus the alternative

                     Ha : at least one βj is non-zero.

This hypothesis test is performed by computing the F -statistic,
                                                                                   F -statistic
76      3. Linear Regression

                          Quantity                         Value
                          Residual standard error          1.69
                          R2                               0.897
                          F -statistic                     570
TABLE 3.6. More information about the least squares model for the regression
of number of units sold on TV, newspaper, and radio advertising budgets in the
Advertising data. Other information about this model was displayed in Table 3.4.

                                      (TSS − RSS)/p
                                F =                   ,                             (3.23)
                                      RSS/(n − p − 1)
                                                      )
where,
)       as with simple linear regression, TSS =         (yi − ȳ)2 and RSS =
             2
  (yi − ŷi ) . If the linear model assumptions are correct, one can show that

                             E{RSS/(n − p − 1)} = σ 2

and that, provided H0 is true,

                              E{(TSS − RSS)/p} = σ 2 .

Hence, when there is no relationship between the response and predictors,
one would expect the F -statistic to take on a value close to 1. On the other
hand, if Ha is true, then E{(TSS − RSS)/p} > σ 2 , so we expect F to be
greater than 1.
   The F -statistic for the multiple linear regression model obtained by re-
gressing sales onto radio, TV, and newspaper is shown in Table 3.6. In this
example the F -statistic is 570. Since this is far larger than 1, it provides
compelling evidence against the null hypothesis H0 . In other words, the
large F -statistic suggests that at least one of the advertising media must
be related to sales. However, what if the F -statistic had been closer to
1? How large does the F -statistic need to be before we can reject H0 and
conclude that there is a relationship? It turns out that the answer depends
on the values of n and p. When n is large, an F -statistic that is just a
little larger than 1 might still provide evidence against H0 . In contrast,
a larger F -statistic is needed to reject H0 if n is small. When H0 is true
and the errors ϵi have a normal distribution, the F -statistic follows an
F -distribution.6 For any given value of n and p, any statistical software
package can be used to compute the p-value associated with the F -statistic
using this distribution. Based on this p-value, we can determine whether
or not to reject H0 . For the advertising data, the p-value associated with
the F -statistic in Table 3.6 is essentially zero, so we have extremely strong
evidence that at least one of the media is associated with increased sales.

   6 Even if the errors are not normally-distributed, the F -statistic approximately follows

an F -distribution provided that the sample size n is large.
                                                3.2 Multiple Linear Regression      77

  In (3.23) we are testing H0 that all the coeﬃcients are zero. Sometimes
we want to test that a particular subset of q of the coeﬃcients are zero.
This corresponds to a null hypothesis
                    H0 :    βp−q+1 = βp−q+2 = · · · = βp = 0,
where for convenience we have put the variables chosen for omission at the
end of the list. In this case we fit a second model that uses all the variables
except those last q. Suppose that the residual sum of squares for that model
is RSS0 . Then the appropriate F -statistic is
                                     (RSS0 − RSS)/q
                               F =                   .                           (3.24)
                                     RSS/(n − p − 1)
    Notice that in Table 3.4, for each individual predictor a t-statistic and
a p-value were reported. These provide information about whether each
individual predictor is related to the response, after adjusting for the other
predictors. It turns out that each of these is exactly equivalent 7 to the F -
test that omits that single variable from the model, leaving all the others
in—i.e. q=1 in (3.24). So it reports the partial eﬀect of adding that variable
to the model. For instance, as we discussed earlier, these p-values indicate
that TV and radio are related to sales, but that there is no evidence that
newspaper is associated with sales, when TV and radio are held fixed.
    Given these individual p-values for each variable, why do we need to look
at the overall F -statistic? After all, it seems likely that if any one of the
p-values for the individual variables is very small, then at least one of the
predictors is related to the response. However, this logic is flawed, especially
when the number of predictors p is large.
    For instance, consider an example in which p = 100 and H0 : β1 = β2 =
· · · = βp = 0 is true, so no variable is truly associated with the response. In
this situation, about 5 % of the p-values associated with each variable (of
the type shown in Table 3.4) will be below 0.05 by chance. In other words,
we expect to see approximately five small p-values even in the absence of
any true association between the predictors and the response.8 In fact, it
is likely that we will observe at least one p-value below 0.05 by chance!
Hence, if we use the individual t-statistics and associated p-values in order
to decide whether or not there is any association between the variables and
the response, there is a very high chance that we will incorrectly conclude
that there is a relationship. However, the F -statistic does not suﬀer from
this problem because it adjusts for the number of predictors. Hence, if H0
is true, there is only a 5 % chance that the F -statistic will result in a p-
value below 0.05, regardless of the number of predictors or the number of
observations.

  7 The square of each t-statistic is the corresponding F -statistic.
  8 This is related to the important concept of multiple testing, which is the focus of

Chapter 13.
78     3. Linear Regression

  The approach of using an F -statistic to test for any association between
the predictors and the response works when p is relatively small, and cer-
tainly small compared to n. However, sometimes we have a very large num-
ber of variables. If p > n then there are more coeﬃcients βj to estimate
than observations from which to estimate them. In this case we cannot
even fit the multiple linear regression model using least squares, so the F -
statistic cannot be used, and neither can most of the other concepts that
we have seen so far in this chapter. When p is large, some of the approaches
discussed in the next section, such as forward selection, can be used. This
high-dimensional setting is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.
                                                                                 high-
                                                                                 dimensional
Two: Deciding on Important Variables
As discussed in the previous section, the first step in a multiple regression
analysis is to compute the F -statistic and to examine the associated p-
value. If we conclude on the basis of that p-value that at least one of the
predictors is related to the response, then it is natural to wonder which are
the guilty ones! We could look at the individual p-values as in Table 3.4,
but as discussed (and as further explored in Chapter 13), if p is large we
are likely to make some false discoveries.
   It is possible that all of the predictors are associated with the response,
but it is more often the case that the response is only associated with
a subset of the predictors. The task of determining which predictors are
associated with the response, in order to fit a single model involving only
those predictors, is referred to as variable selection. The variable selection
                                                                                 variable
problem is studied extensively in Chapter 6, and so here we will provide selection
only a brief outline of some classical approaches.
   Ideally, we would like to perform variable selection by trying out a lot of
diﬀerent models, each containing a diﬀerent subset of the predictors. For
instance, if p = 2, then we can consider four models: (1) a model contain-
ing no variables, (2) a model containing X1 only, (3) a model containing
X2 only, and (4) a model containing both X1 and X2 . We can then se-
lect the best model out of all of the models that we have considered. How
do we determine which model is best? Various statistics can be used to
judge the quality of a model. These include Mallow’s Cp , Akaike informa-
                                                                                 Mallow’s Cp
tion criterion (AIC), Bayesian information criterion (BIC), and adjusted
  2                                                                              Akaike
R . These are discussed in more detail in Chapter 6. We can also deter- information
mine which model is best by plotting various model outputs, such as the criterion
residuals, in order to search for patterns.                                      Bayesian
   Unfortunately, there are a total of 2p models that contain subsets of p information
variables. This means that even for moderate p, trying out every possible criterion
                                                                                            2
subset of the predictors is infeasible. For instance, we saw that if p = 2, then adjusted R
            2
there are 2 = 4 models to consider. But if p = 30, then we must consider
230 = 1,073,741,824 models! This is not practical. Therefore, unless p is very
small, we cannot consider all 2p models, and instead we need an automated
                                          3.2 Multiple Linear Regression    79

and eﬃcient approach to choose a smaller set of models to consider. There
are three classical approaches for this task:
   • Forward selection. We begin with the null model—a model that con-
                                                                           forward
     tains an intercept but no predictors. We then fit p simple linear re- selection
     gressions and add to the null model the variable that results in the null model
     lowest RSS. We then add to that model the variable that results
     in the lowest RSS for the new two-variable model. This approach is
     continued until some stopping rule is satisfied.
   • Backward selection. We start with all variables in the model, and
                                                                              backward
     remove the variable with the largest p-value—that is, the variable selection
     that is the least statistically significant. The new (p − 1)-variable
     model is fit, and the variable with the largest p-value is removed. This
     procedure continues until a stopping rule is reached. For instance, we
     may stop when all remaining variables have a p-value below some
     threshold.
   • Mixed selection. This is a combination of forward and backward se-
                                                                           mixed
     lection. We start with no variables in the model, and as with forward selection
     selection, we add the variable that provides the best fit. We con-
     tinue to add variables one-by-one. Of course, as we noted with the
     Advertising example, the p-values for variables can become larger as
     new predictors are added to the model. Hence, if at any point the
     p-value for one of the variables in the model rises above a certain
     threshold, then we remove that variable from the model. We con-
     tinue to perform these forward and backward steps until all variables
     in the model have a suﬃciently low p-value, and all variables outside
     the model would have a large p-value if added to the model.
Backward selection cannot be used if p > n, while forward selection can
always be used. Forward selection is a greedy approach, and might include
variables early that later become redundant. Mixed selection can remedy
this.

Three: Model Fit
Two of the most common numerical measures of model fit are the RSE and
R2 , the fraction of variance explained. These quantities are computed and
interpreted in the same fashion as for simple linear regression.
   Recall that in simple regression, R2 is the square of the correlation of the
response and the variable. In multiple linear regression, it turns out that it
equals Cor(Y, Ŷ )2 , the square of the correlation between the response and
the fitted linear model; in fact one property of the fitted linear model is
that it maximizes this correlation among all possible linear models.
   An R2 value close to 1 indicates that the model explains a large portion
of the variance in the response variable. As an example, we saw in Table 3.6
80     3. Linear Regression

that for the Advertising data, the model that uses all three advertising me-
dia to predict sales has an R2 of 0.8972. On the other hand, the model
that uses only TV and radio to predict sales has an R2 value of 0.89719.
In other words, there is a small increase in R2 if we include newspaper
advertising in the model that already contains TV and radio advertising,
even though we saw earlier that the p-value for newspaper advertising in
Table 3.4 is not significant. It turns out that R2 will always increase when
more variables are added to the model, even if those variables are only
weakly associated with the response. This is due to the fact that adding
another variable always results in a decrease in the residual sum of squares
on the training data (though not necessarily the testing data). Thus, the
R2 statistic, which is also computed on the training data, must increase.
The fact that adding newspaper advertising to the model containing only
TV and radio advertising leads to just a tiny increase in R2 provides addi-
tional evidence that newspaper can be dropped from the model. Essentially,
newspaper provides no real improvement in the model fit to the training
samples, and its inclusion will likely lead to poor results on independent
test samples due to overfitting.
   By contrast, the model containing only TV as a predictor had an R2 of
0.61 (Table 3.2). Adding radio to the model leads to a substantial improve-
ment in R2 . This implies that a model that uses TV and radio expenditures
to predict sales is substantially better than one that uses only TV advertis-
ing. We could further quantify this improvement by looking at the p-value
for the radio coeﬃcient in a model that contains only TV and radio as
predictors.
   The model that contains only TV and radio as predictors has an RSE
of 1.681, and the model that also contains newspaper as a predictor has
an RSE of 1.686 (Table 3.6). In contrast, the model that contains only TV
has an RSE of 3.26 (Table 3.2). This corroborates our previous conclusion
that a model that uses TV and radio expenditures to predict sales is much
more accurate (on the training data) than one that only uses TV spending.
Furthermore, given that TV and radio expenditures are used as predictors,
there is no point in also using newspaper spending as a predictor in the
model. The observant reader may wonder how RSE can increase when
newspaper is added to the model given that RSS must decrease. In general
RSE is defined as
                                   9
                                          1
                           RSE =               RSS,                    (3.25)
                                      n−p−1

which simplifies to (3.15) for a simple linear regression. Thus, models with
more variables can have higher RSE if the decrease in RSS is small relative
to the increase in p.
  In addition to looking at the RSE and R2 statistics just discussed, it
can be useful to plot the data. Graphical summaries can reveal problems
with a model that are not visible from numerical statistics. For example,
                                                 3.2 Multiple Linear Regression           81


                 Sales




                                                             TV


                                                                            Radio




FIGURE 3.5. For the Advertising data, a linear regression fit to sales using
TV and radio as predictors. From the pattern of the residuals, we can see that
there is a pronounced non-linear relationship in the data. The positive residuals
(those visible above the surface), tend to lie along the 45-degree line, where TV
and Radio budgets are split evenly. The negative residuals (most not visible), tend
to lie away from this line, where budgets are more lopsided.


Figure 3.5 displays a three-dimensional plot of TV and radio versus sales.
We see that some observations lie above and some observations lie below
the least squares regression plane. In particular, the linear model seems to
overestimate sales for instances in which most of the advertising money
was spent exclusively on either TV or radio. It underestimates sales for
instances where the budget was split between the two media. This pro-
nounced non-linear pattern suggests a synergy or interaction eﬀect between
                                                                             interaction
the advertising media, whereby combining the media together results in a
bigger boost to sales than using any single medium. In Section 3.3.2, we
will discuss extending the linear model to accommodate such synergistic
eﬀects through the use of interaction terms.


Four: Predictions
Once we have fit the multiple regression model, it is straightforward to
apply (3.21) in order to predict the response Y on the basis of a set of
values for the predictors X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp . However, there are three sorts of
uncertainty associated with this prediction.

   1. The coeﬃcient estimates β̂0 , β̂1 , . . . , β̂p are estimates for β0 , β1 , . . . , βp .
      That is, the least squares plane

                               Ŷ = β̂0 + β̂1 X1 + · · · + β̂p Xp
82       3. Linear Regression

        is only an estimate for the true population regression plane

                           f (X) = β0 + β1 X1 + · · · + βp Xp .

        The inaccuracy in the coeﬃcient estimates is related to the reducible
        error from Chapter 2. We can compute a confidence interval in order
        to determine how close Ŷ will be to f (X).

     2. Of course, in practice assuming a linear model for f (X) is almost
        always an approximation of reality, so there is an additional source of
        potentially reducible error which we call model bias. So when we use a
        linear model, we are in fact estimating the best linear approximation
        to the true surface. However, here we will ignore this discrepancy,
        and operate as if the linear model were correct.

     3. Even if we knew f (X)—that is, even if we knew the true values
        for β0 , β1 , . . . , βp —the response value cannot be predicted perfectly
        because of the random error ϵ in the model (3.20). In Chapter 2, we
        referred to this as the irreducible error. How much will Y vary from
        Ŷ ? We use prediction intervals to answer this question. Prediction
        intervals are always wider than confidence intervals, because they
        incorporate both the error in the estimate for f (X) (the reducible
        error) and the uncertainty as to how much an individual point will
        diﬀer from the population regression plane (the irreducible error).

   We use a confidence interval to quantify the uncertainty surrounding
                                                                                confidence
the average sales over a large number of cities. For example, given that interval
$100,000 is spent on TV advertising and $20,000 is spent on radio advertising
in each city, the 95 % confidence interval is [10,985, 11,528]. We interpret
this to mean that 95 % of intervals of this form will contain the true value of
f (X).9 On the other hand, a prediction interval can be used to quantify the
                                                                                prediction
uncertainty surrounding sales for a particular city. Given that $100,000 is interval
spent on TV advertising and $20,000 is spent on radio advertising in that city
the 95 % prediction interval is [7,930, 14,580]. We interpret this to mean
that 95 % of intervals of this form will contain the true value of Y for this
city. Note that both intervals are centered at 11,256, but that the prediction
interval is substantially wider than the confidence interval, reflecting the
increased uncertainty about sales for a given city in comparison to the
average sales over many locations.




   9 In other words, if we collect a large number of data sets like the Advertising data

set, and we construct a confidence interval for the average sales on the basis of each
data set (given $100,000 in TV and $20,000 in radio advertising), then 95 % of these
confidence intervals will contain the true value of average sales.
                       3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model       83

3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model
3.3.1 Qualitative Predictors
In our discussion so far, we have assumed that all variables in our linear
regression model are quantitative. But in practice, this is not necessarily
the case; often some predictors are qualitative.
   For example, the Credit data set displayed in Figure 3.6 records variables
for a number of credit card holders. The response is balance (average credit
card debt for each individual) and there are several quantitative predictors:
age, cards (number of credit cards), education (years of education), income
(in thousands of dollars), limit (credit limit), and rating (credit rating).
Each panel of Figure 3.6 is a scatterplot for a pair of variables whose iden-
tities are given by the corresponding row and column labels. For example,
the scatterplot directly to the right of the word “Balance” depicts balance
versus age, while the plot directly to the right of “Age” corresponds to
age versus cards. In addition to these quantitative variables, we also have
four qualitative variables: own (house ownership), student (student status),
status (marital status), and region (East, West or South).

Predictors with Only Two Levels
Suppose that we wish to investigate diﬀerences in credit card balance be-
tween those who own a house and those who don’t, ignoring the other vari-
ables for the moment. If a qualitative predictor (also known as a factor)
                                                                              factor
only has two levels, or possible values, then incorporating it into a regres-
                                                                              level
sion model is very simple. We simply create an indicator or dummy variable
                                                                              dummy
that takes on two possible numerical values.10 For example, based on the variable
own variable, we can create a new variable that takes the form
                   =
                     1    if ith person owns a house
              xi =                                                     (3.26)
                     0    if ith person does not own a house,

and use this variable as a predictor in the regression equation. This results
in the model
                            =
                              β0 + β1 + ϵ i if ith person owns a house
 yi = β 0 + β 1 x i + ϵ i =                                            (3.27)
                              β0 + ϵ i      if ith person does not.

Now β0 can be interpreted as the average credit card balance among those
who do not own, β0 + β1 as the average credit card balance among those
who do own their house, and β1 as the average diﬀerence in credit card
balance between owners and non-owners.

  10 In the machine learning community, the creation of dummy variables to handle

qualitative predictors is known as “one-hot encoding”.
84                 3. Linear Regression


                              20   40   60    80   100                    5     10   15   20                    2000    8000   14000



                                                                                                                                                          1500

                 Balance
                                                                                                                                                          500

                                                                                                                                                          0
     100

     80

     60                                 Age
     40

     20

                                                                                                                                                          8

                                                                                                                                                          6
                                                             Cards                                                                                        4

                                                                                                                                                          2


     20


     15
                                                                              Education
     10


     5



                                                                                                                                                          150


                                                                                               Income                                                     100

                                                                                                                                                          50



     14000



     8000
                                                                                                                       Limit
     2000

                                                                                                                                                          1000



                                                                                                                                                          600
                                                                                                                                         Rating
                                                                                                                                                          200


             0   500   1500                              2    4   6   8                        50   100   150                          200   600   1000




FIGURE 3.6. The Credit data set contains information about balance, age,
cards, education, income, limit, and rating for a number of potential cus-
tomers.


   Table 3.7 displays the coeﬃcient estimates and other information asso-
ciated with the model (3.27). The average credit card debt for non-owners
is estimated to be $509.80, whereas owners are estimated to carry $19.73
in additional debt for a total of $509.80 + $19.73 = $529.53. However, we
notice that the p-value for the dummy variable is very high. This indicates
that there is no statistical evidence of a diﬀerence in average credit card
balance based on house ownership.
   The decision to code owners as 1 and non-owners as 0 in (3.27) is ar-
bitrary, and has no eﬀect on the regression fit, but does alter the inter-
pretation of the coeﬃcients. If we had coded non-owners as 1 and own-
ers as 0, then the estimates for β0 and β1 would have been 529.53 and
−19.73, respectively, leading once again to a prediction of credit card debt
of $529.53 − $19.73 = $509.80 for non-owners and a prediction of $529.53
                         3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model        85

                       Coeﬃcient        Std. error   t-statistic    p-value
       Intercept          509.80             33.13       15.389    < 0.0001
       own[Yes]            19.73             46.05        0.429      0.6690
TABLE 3.7. Least squares coeﬃcient estimates associated with the regression of
balance onto own in the Credit data set. The linear model is given in (3.27).
That is, ownership is encoded as a dummy variable, as in (3.26).


for owners. Alternatively, instead of a 0/1 coding scheme, we could create
a dummy variable
                   =
                       1          if ith person owns a house
            xi =
                       −1         if ith person does not own a house

and use this variable in the regression equation. This results in the model
                         =
                             β0 + β1 + ϵ i   if ith person owns a house
yi = β0 +β1 xi +ϵi =
                             β0 − β1 + ϵ i   if ith person does not own a house.

Now β0 can be interpreted as the overall average credit card balance (ig-
noring the house ownership eﬀect), and β1 is the amount by which house
owners and non-owners have credit card balances that are above and below
the average, respectively. In this example, the estimate for β0 is $519.665,
halfway between the non-owner and owner averages of $509.80 and $529.53.
The estimate for β1 is $9.865, which is half of $19.73, the average diﬀerence
between owners and non-owners. It is important to note that the final pre-
dictions for the credit balances of owners and non-owners will be identical
regardless of the coding scheme used. The only diﬀerence is in the way that
the coeﬃcients are interpreted.

Qualitative Predictors with More than Two Levels
When a qualitative predictor has more than two levels, a single dummy
variable cannot represent all possible values. In this situation, we can create
additional dummy variables. For example, for the region variable we create
two dummy variables. The first could be
                     =
                         1      if ith person is from the South
             xi1 =                                                            (3.28)
                         0      if ith person is not from the South,

and the second could be
                  =
                    1   if ith person is from the West
            xi2 =                                                             (3.29)
                    0   if ith person is not from the West.
86       3. Linear Regression

                         Coeﬃcient      Std. error    t-statistic    p-value
       Intercept            531.00           46.32        11.464    < 0.0001
       region[South]        −18.69           65.02       −0.287       0.7740
       region[West]         −12.50           56.68       −0.221       0.8260
TABLE 3.8. Least squares coeﬃcient estimates associated with the regression of
balance onto region in the Credit data set. The linear model is given in (3.30).
That is, region is encoded via two dummy variables (3.28) and (3.29).

Then both of these variables can be used in the regression equation, in
order to obtain the model
                                  ⎧
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎨β0 +β1 +ϵi   if ith person is from the South
     yi = β0 +β1 xi1 +β2 xi2 +ϵi = β0 +β2 +ϵi   if ith person is from the West
                                  ⎪
                                  ⎩
                                    β0 +ϵi      if ith person is from the East.
                                                                             (3.30)
Now β0 can be interpreted as the average credit card balance for individuals
from the East, β1 can be interpreted as the diﬀerence in the average balance
between people from the South versus the East, and β2 can be interpreted
as the diﬀerence in the average balance between those from the West versus
the East. There will always be one fewer dummy variable than the number
of levels. The level with no dummy variable—East in this example—is
known as the baseline.
                                                                                baseline
   From Table 3.8, we see that the estimated balance for the baseline, East,
is $531.00. It is estimated that those in the South will have $18.69 less
debt than those in the East, and that those in the West will have $12.50
less debt than those in the East. However, the p-values associated with the
coeﬃcient estimates for the two dummy variables are very large, suggesting
no statistical evidence of a real diﬀerence in average credit card balance
between South and East or between West and East.11 Once again, the
level selected as the baseline category is arbitrary, and the final predictions
for each group will be the same regardless of this choice. However, the
coeﬃcients and their p-values do depend on the choice of dummy variable
coding. Rather than rely on the individual coeﬃcients, we can use an F -test
to test H0 : β1 = β2 = 0; this does not depend on the coding. This F -test
has a p-value of 0.96, indicating that we cannot reject the null hypothesis
that there is no relationship between balance and region.
   Using this dummy variable approach presents no diﬃculties when in-
corporating both quantitative and qualitative predictors. For example, to
regress balance on both a quantitative variable such as income and a qual-
itative variable such as student, we must simply create a dummy variable
for student and then fit a multiple regression model using income and the
dummy variable as predictors for credit card balance.

  11 There could still in theory be a diﬀerence between South and West, although the

data here does not suggest any diﬀerence.
                      3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model     87

   There are many diﬀerent ways of coding qualitative variables besides
the dummy variable approach taken here. All of these approaches lead to
equivalent model fits, but the coeﬃcients are diﬀerent and have diﬀerent
interpretations, and are designed to measure particular contrasts. This topic contrast
is beyond the scope of the book.


3.3.2 Extensions of the Linear Model
The standard linear regression model (3.19) provides interpretable results
and works quite well on many real-world problems. However, it makes sev-
eral highly restrictive assumptions that are often violated in practice. Two
of the most important assumptions state that the relationship between the
predictors and response are additive and linear. The additivity assumption
                                                                             additive
means that the association between a predictor Xj and the response Y does linear
not depend on the values of the other predictors. The linearity assumption
states that the change in the response Y associated with a one-unit change
in Xj is constant, regardless of the value of Xj . In later chapters of this
book, we examine a number of sophisticated methods that relax these two
assumptions. Here, we briefly examine some common classical approaches
for extending the linear model.


Removing the Additive Assumption
In our previous analysis of the Advertising data, we concluded that both TV
and radio seem to be associated with sales. The linear models that formed
the basis for this conclusion assumed that the eﬀect on sales of increasing
one advertising medium is independent of the amount spent on the other
media. For example, the linear model (3.20) states that the average increase
in sales associated with a one-unit increase in TV is always β1 , regardless
of the amount spent on radio.
   However, this simple model may be incorrect. Suppose that spending
money on radio advertising actually increases the eﬀectiveness of TV ad-
vertising, so that the slope term for TV should increase as radio increases.
In this situation, given a fixed budget of $100,000, spending half on radio
and half on TV may increase sales more than allocating the entire amount
to either TV or to radio. In marketing, this is known as a synergy eﬀect,
and in statistics it is referred to as an interaction eﬀect. Figure 3.5 sug-
gests that such an eﬀect may be present in the advertising data. Notice
that when levels of either TV or radio are low, then the true sales are lower
than predicted by the linear model. But when advertising is split between
the two media, then the model tends to underestimate sales.
   Consider the standard linear regression model with two variables,

                        Y = β0 + β1 X1 + β2 X2 + ϵ.
88       3. Linear Regression

According to this model, a one-unit increase in X1 is associated with an
average increase in Y of β1 units. Notice that the presence of X2 does
not alter this statement—that is, regardless of the value of X2 , a one-
unit increase in X1 is associated with a β1 -unit increase in Y . One way of
extending this model is to include a third predictor, called an interaction
term, which is constructed by computing the product of X1 and X2 . This
results in the model

                    Y = β0 + β1 X1 + β2 X2 + β3 X1 X2 + ϵ.              (3.31)

How does inclusion of this interaction term relax the additive assumption?
Notice that (3.31) can be rewritten as

                    Y   =   β0 + (β1 + β3 X2 )X1 + β2 X2 + ϵ            (3.32)
                        =   β0 + β̃1 X1 + β2 X2 + ϵ

where β̃1 = β1 + β3 X2 . Since β̃1 is now a function of X2 , the association
between X1 and Y is no longer constant: a change in the value of X2 will
change the association between X1 and Y . A similar argument shows that
a change in the value of X1 changes the association between X2 and Y .
   For example, suppose that we are interested in studying the productiv-
ity of a factory. We wish to predict the number of units produced on the
basis of the number of production lines and the total number of workers.
It seems likely that the eﬀect of increasing the number of production lines
will depend on the number of workers, since if no workers are available
to operate the lines, then increasing the number of lines will not increase
production. This suggests that it would be appropriate to include an inter-
action term between lines and workers in a linear model to predict units.
Suppose that when we fit the model, we obtain

 units    ≈   1.2 + 3.4 × lines + 0.22 × workers + 1.4 × (lines × workers)
          = 1.2 + (3.4 + 1.4 × workers) × lines + 0.22 × workers.

In other words, adding an additional line will increase the number of units
produced by 3.4 + 1.4 × workers. Hence the more workers we have, the
stronger will be the eﬀect of lines.
   We now return to the Advertising example. A linear model that uses
radio, TV, and an interaction between the two to predict sales takes the
form

      sales     =   β0 + β1 × TV + β2 × radio + β3 × (radio × TV) + ϵ
                =   β0 + (β1 + β3 × radio) × TV + β2 × radio + ϵ.       (3.33)

We can interpret β3 as the increase in the eﬀectiveness of TV advertising
associated with a one-unit increase in radio advertising (or vice-versa). The
coeﬃcients that result from fitting the model (3.33) are given in Table 3.9.
                       3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model       89

                     Coeﬃcient      Std. error   t-statistic    p-value
        Intercept       6.7502           0.248        27.23    < 0.0001
        TV              0.0191           0.002        12.70    < 0.0001
        radio           0.0289           0.009         3.24      0.0014
        TV×radio        0.0011           0.000        20.73    < 0.0001
TABLE 3.9. For the Advertising data, least squares coeﬃcient estimates asso-
ciated with the regression of sales onto TV and radio, with an interaction term,
as in (3.33).


   The results in Table 3.9 strongly suggest that the model that includes the
interaction term is superior to the model that contains only main eﬀects.
                                                                                 main eﬀect
The p-value for the interaction term, TV×radio, is extremely low, indicating
that there is strong evidence for Ha : β3 ̸= 0. In other words, it is clear that
the true relationship is not additive. The R2 for the model (3.33) is 96.8 %,
compared to only 89.7 % for the model that predicts sales using TV and
radio without an interaction term. This means that (96.8 − 89.7)/(100 −
89.7) = 69 % of the variability in sales that remains after fitting the ad-
ditive model has been explained by the interaction term. The coeﬃcient
estimates in Table 3.9 suggest that an increase in TV advertising of $1,000 is
associated with increased sales of (β̂1 + β̂3 × radio)×1,000 = 19+1.1× radio
units. And an increase in radio advertising of $1,000 will be associated with
an increase in sales of (β̂2 + β̂3 × TV) × 1,000 = 29 + 1.1 × TV units.
   In this example, the p-values associated with TV, radio, and the interac-
tion term all are statistically significant (Table 3.9), and so it is obvious
that all three variables should be included in the model. However, it is
sometimes the case that an interaction term has a very small p-value, but
the associated main eﬀects (in this case, TV and radio) do not. The hier-
archical principle states that if we include an interaction in a model, we
                                                                                 hierarchical
should also include the main eﬀects, even if the p-values associated with principle
their coeﬃcients are not significant. In other words, if the interaction be-
tween X1 and X2 seems important, then we should include both X1 and
X2 in the model even if their coeﬃcient estimates have large p-values. The
rationale for this principle is that if X1 × X2 is related to the response,
then whether or not the coeﬃcients of X1 or X2 are exactly zero is of lit-
tle interest. Also X1 × X2 is typically correlated with X1 and X2 , and so
leaving them out tends to alter the meaning of the interaction.
   In the previous example, we considered an interaction between TV and
radio, both of which are quantitative variables. However, the concept of
interactions applies just as well to qualitative variables, or to a combination
of quantitative and qualitative variables. In fact, an interaction between
a qualitative variable and a quantitative variable has a particularly nice
interpretation. Consider the Credit data set from Section 3.3.1, and suppose
that we wish to predict balance using the income (quantitative) and student
(qualitative) variables. In the absence of an interaction term, the model
90               3. Linear Regression



          1400                                                   1400       student
                                                                            non−student

          1000                                                   1000
Balance                                                Balance
          600                                                    600


          200                                                    200

                  0        50        100   150                          0     50          100    150

                                Income                                             Income


FIGURE 3.7. For the Credit data, the least squares lines are shown for pre-
diction of balance from income for students and non-students. Left: The model
(3.34) was fit. There is no interaction between income and student. Right: The
model (3.35) was fit. There is an interaction term between income and student.

takes the form
                                                  =
                                                      β2           if ith person is a student
balancei              ≈   β0 + β1 × incomei +
                                                      0            if ith person is not a student
                                           =
                                               β0 + β2             if ith person is a student
                      =   β1 × incomei +
                                               β0                  if ith person is not a student.
                                                                                                (3.34)

Notice that this amounts to fitting two parallel lines to the data, one for
students and one for non-students. The lines for students and non-students
have diﬀerent intercepts, β0 + β2 versus β0 , but the same slope, β1 . This
is illustrated in the left-hand panel of Figure 3.7. The fact that the lines
are parallel means that the average eﬀect on balance of a one-unit increase
in income does not depend on whether or not the individual is a student.
This represents a potentially serious limitation of the model, since in fact a
change in income may have a very diﬀerent eﬀect on the credit card balance
of a student versus a non-student.
   This limitation can be addressed by adding an interaction variable, cre-
ated by multiplying income with the dummy variable for student. Our
model now becomes
                                       =
                                         β2 + β3 × incomei if student
  balancei ≈ β0 + β1 × incomei +
                                         0                    if not student
                  =
                    (β0 + β2 ) + (β1 + β3 ) × incomei if student
             =
                    β0 + β1 × incomei                  if not student.
                                                                                                (3.35)
                               3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model      91


                     50                                                   Linear
                                                                          Degree 2
                                                                          Degree 5

                     40




  Miles per gallon
                     30




                     20




                     10


                          50        100             150             200

                                             Horsepower


FIGURE 3.8. The Auto data set. For a number of cars, mpg and horsepower are
shown. The linear regression fit is shown in orange. The linear regression fit for a
model that includes horsepower2 is shown as a blue curve. The linear regression
fit for a model that includes all polynomials of horsepower up to fifth-degree is
shown in green.


Once again, we have two diﬀerent regression lines for the students and
the non-students. But now those regression lines have diﬀerent intercepts,
β0 +β2 versus β0 , as well as diﬀerent slopes, β1 +β3 versus β1 . This allows for
the possibility that changes in income may aﬀect the credit card balances
of students and non-students diﬀerently. The right-hand panel of Figure 3.7
shows the estimated relationships between income and balance for students
and non-students in the model (3.35). We note that the slope for students
is lower than the slope for non-students. This suggests that increases in
income are associated with smaller increases in credit card balance among
students as compared to non-students.


Non-linear Relationships
As discussed previously, the linear regression model (3.19) assumes a linear
relationship between the response and predictors. But in some cases, the
true relationship between the response and the predictors may be non-
linear. Here we present a very simple way to directly extend the linear model
to accommodate non-linear relationships, using polynomial regression. In
                                                                              polynomial
later chapters, we will present more complex approaches for performing regression
non-linear fits in more general settings.
92       3. Linear Regression

                       Coeﬃcient     Std. error   t-statistic     p-value
        Intercept        56.9001        1.8004          31.6     < 0.0001
        horsepower       −0.4662        0.0311        −15.0      < 0.0001
        horsepower2       0.0012        0.0001          10.1     < 0.0001
TABLE 3.10. For the Auto data set, least squares coeﬃcient estimates associated
with the regression of mpg onto horsepower and horsepower2 .

   Consider Figure 3.8, in which the mpg (gas mileage in miles per gallon)
versus horsepower is shown for a number of cars in the Auto data set. The
orange line represents the linear regression fit. There is a pronounced rela-
tionship between mpg and horsepower, but it seems clear that this relation-
ship is in fact non-linear: the data suggest a curved relationship. A simple
approach for incorporating non-linear associations in a linear model is to
include transformed versions of the predictors. For example, the points in
Figure 3.8 seem to have a quadratic shape, suggesting that a model of the
                                                                              quadratic
form
                                                             2
             mpg = β0 + β1 × horsepower + β2 × horsepower + ϵ          (3.36)
may provide a better fit. Equation 3.36 involves predicting mpg using a
non-linear function of horsepower. But it is still a linear model! That is,
(3.36) is simply a multiple linear regression model with X1 = horsepower
and X2 = horsepower2 . So we can use standard linear regression software to
estimate β0 , β1 , and β2 in order to produce a non-linear fit. The blue curve
in Figure 3.8 shows the resulting quadratic fit to the data. The quadratic
fit appears to be substantially better than the fit obtained when just the
linear term is included. The R2 of the quadratic fit is 0.688, compared to
0.606 for the linear fit, and the p-value in Table 3.10 for the quadratic term
is highly significant.
   If including horsepower2 led to such a big improvement in the model, why
not include horsepower3 , horsepower4 , or even horsepower5 ? The green curve
in Figure 3.8 displays the fit that results from including all polynomials up
to fifth degree in the model (3.36). The resulting fit seems unnecessarily
wiggly—that is, it is unclear that including the additional terms really has
led to a better fit to the data.
   The approach that we have just described for extending the linear model
to accommodate non-linear relationships is known as polynomial regres-
sion, since we have included polynomial functions of the predictors in the
regression model. We further explore this approach and other non-linear
extensions of the linear model in Chapter 7.


3.3.3 Potential Problems
When we fit a linear regression model to a particular data set, many prob-
lems may occur. Most common among these are the following:
     1. Non-linearity of the response-predictor relationships.
                                         3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model                                       93

            2. Correlation of error terms.

            3. Non-constant variance of error terms.

            4. Outliers.

            5. High-leverage points.

            6. Collinearity.

  In practice, identifying and overcoming these problems is as much an
art as a science. Many pages in countless books have been written on this
topic. Since the linear regression model is not our primary focus here, we
will provide only a brief summary of some key points.

1. Non-linearity of the Data


                          Residual Plot for Linear Fit                                   Residual Plot for Quadratic Fit
            20
                                                      323                                334
                                                                          15                                        323
            15                                        330
                                          334
                                                                          10
            10
                                                                          5


Residuals                                                     Residuals
            5

                                                                          0
            0

                                                                          −5
            −5



                                                                          −15 −10
            −15 −10                                                                                           155



                      5   10     15      20      25      30                         15         20       25          30     35

                                 Fitted values                                                      Fitted values


FIGURE 3.9. Plots of residuals versus predicted (or fitted) values for the Auto
data set. In each plot, the red line is a smooth fit to the residuals, intended to make
it easier to identify a trend. Left: A linear regression of mpg on horsepower. A
strong pattern in the residuals indicates non-linearity in the data. Right: A linear
regression of mpg on horsepower and horsepower2 . There is little pattern in the
residuals.

   The linear regression model assumes that there is a straight-line rela-
tionship between the predictors and the response. If the true relationship
is far from linear, then virtually all of the conclusions that we draw from
the fit are suspect. In addition, the prediction accuracy of the model can
be significantly reduced.
   Residual plots are a useful graphical tool for identifying non-linearity.
                                                                                 residual plot
Given a simple linear regression model, we can plot the residuals, ei =
yi − ŷi , versus the predictor xi . In the case of a multiple regression model,
94     3. Linear Regression

since there are multiple predictors, we instead plot the residuals versus
the predicted (or fitted) values ŷi . Ideally, the residual plot will show no
                                                                                 fitted
discernible pattern. The presence of a pattern may indicate a problem with
some aspect of the linear model.
   The left panel of Figure 3.9 displays a residual plot from the linear re-
gression of mpg onto horsepower on the Auto data set that was illustrated in
Figure 3.8. The red line is a smooth fit to the residuals, which is displayed in
order to make it easier to identify any trends. The residuals exhibit a clear
U-shape, which provides a strong indication of non-linearity in the data.
In contrast, the right-hand panel of Figure 3.9 displays the residual plot
that results from the model (3.36), which contains a quadratic term. There
appears to be little pattern in the residuals, suggesting that the quadratic
term improves the fit to the data.
   If the residual plot indicates that there are non-linear associations in the
data, then a simple approach  √ is to use non-linear transformations of the
predictors, such as log X, X, and X 2 , in the regression model. In the
later chapters of this book, we will discuss other more advanced non-linear
approaches for addressing this issue.


2. Correlation of Error Terms
An important assumption of the linear regression model is that the error
terms, ϵ1 , ϵ2 , . . . , ϵn , are uncorrelated. What does this mean? For instance,
if the errors are uncorrelated, then the fact that ϵi is positive provides
little or no information about the sign of ϵi+1 . The standard errors that
are computed for the estimated regression coeﬃcients or the fitted values
are based on the assumption of uncorrelated error terms. If in fact there is
correlation among the error terms, then the estimated standard errors will
tend to underestimate the true standard errors. As a result, confidence and
prediction intervals will be narrower than they should be. For example,
a 95 % confidence interval may in reality have a much lower probability
than 0.95 of containing the true value of the parameter. In addition, p-
values associated with the model will be lower than they should be; this
could cause us to erroneously conclude that a parameter is statistically
significant. In short, if the error terms are correlated, we may have an
unwarranted sense of confidence in our model.
   As an extreme example, suppose we accidentally doubled our data, lead-
ing to observations and error terms identical in pairs. If we ignored this, our
standard error calculations would be as if we had a sample of size 2n, when
in fact we have only n samples. Our estimated parameters would be the
same for the 2n samples as for the√n samples, but the confidence intervals
would be narrower by a factor of 2!
   Why might correlations among the error terms occur? Such correlations
frequently occur in the context of time series data, which consists of ob-
                                                                                   time series
servations for which measurements are obtained at discrete points in time.
                           3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model         95


                                                ρ=0.0

           3
           2
           1


Residual   −1 0


           −3


                  0   20             40                 60     80             100

                                                ρ=0.5


           2
           1


Residual
           0


           −2


           −4
                  0   20             40                 60     80             100

                                                ρ=0.9

           1.5


           0.5


Residual
           −0.5


           −1.5


                  0   20             40                 60     80             100


                                          Observation


FIGURE 3.10. Plots of residuals from simulated time series data sets generated
with diﬀering levels of correlation ρ between error terms for adjacent time points.

In many cases, observations that are obtained at adjacent time points will
have positively correlated errors. In order to determine if this is the case for
a given data set, we can plot the residuals from our model as a function of
time. If the errors are uncorrelated, then there should be no discernible pat-
tern. On the other hand, if the error terms are positively correlated, then
we may see tracking in the residuals—that is, adjacent residuals may have
                                                                                 tracking
similar values. Figure 3.10 provides an illustration. In the top panel, we see
the residuals from a linear regression fit to data generated with uncorre-
lated errors. There is no evidence of a time-related trend in the residuals.
In contrast, the residuals in the bottom panel are from a data set in which
adjacent errors had a correlation of 0.9. Now there is a clear pattern in the
residuals—adjacent residuals tend to take on similar values. Finally, the
center panel illustrates a more moderate case in which the residuals had a
correlation of 0.5. There is still evidence of tracking, but the pattern is less
clear.
   Many methods have been developed to properly take account of corre-
lations in the error terms in time series data. Correlation among the error
96                3. Linear Regression

                             Response Y                                                                  Response log(Y)

            15                                      998                0.4
                                                   975
                                                  845
            10
                                                                       0.2

                                                                       0.0
            5


Residuals                                                  Residuals




                                                                       −0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2
            0


            −5
                                                                                                                      605

            −10                                                                                                         671
                                                                                                                437



                  10    15        20         25       30                                     2.4   2.6    2.8         3.0     3.2   3.4

                             Fitted values                                                                Fitted values


FIGURE 3.11. Residual plots. In each plot, the red line is a smooth fit to the
residuals, intended to make it easier to identify a trend. The blue lines track the
outer quantiles of the residuals, and emphasize patterns. Left: The funnel shape
indicates heteroscedasticity. Right: The response has been log transformed, and
there is now no evidence of heteroscedasticity.


terms can also occur outside of time series data. For instance, consider a
study in which individuals’ heights are predicted from their weights. The
assumption of uncorrelated errors could be violated if some of the indi-
viduals in the study are members of the same family, eat the same diet,
or have been exposed to the same environmental factors. In general, the
assumption of uncorrelated errors is extremely important for linear regres-
sion as well as for other statistical methods, and good experimental design
is crucial in order to mitigate the risk of such correlations.

3. Non-constant Variance of Error Terms
Another important assumption of the linear regression model is that the
error terms have a constant variance, Var(ϵi ) = σ 2 . The standard errors,
confidence intervals, and hypothesis tests associated with the linear model
rely upon this assumption.
   Unfortunately, it is often the case that the variances of the error terms are
non-constant. For instance, the variances of the error terms may increase
with the value of the response. One can identify non-constant variances in
the errors, or heteroscedasticity, from the presence of a funnel shape in
                                                                                 hetero-
the residual plot. An example is shown in the left-hand panel of Figure 3.11, scedasticity
in which the magnitude of the residuals tends to increase with the fitted
values. When faced with this problem, one possible solution is√to trans-
form the response Y using a concave function such as log Y or Y . Such
a transformation results in a greater amount of shrinkage of the larger re-
sponses, leading to a reduction in heteroscedasticity. The right-hand panel
                                    3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model                                                           97

                   20                                               20                                        6              20
    6                                               4




                                                                                      Studentized Residuals
    4                                               3                                                         4



                                        Residuals
                                                    2
Y   2
                                                                                                              2
                                                    1
    0
                                                    0
                                                                                                              0
    −2
                                                    −1
    −4

         −2   −1    0       1   2                        −2   0      2      4     6                               −2   0      2      4     6

                        X                                         Fitted Values                                            Fitted Values



FIGURE 3.12. Left: The least squares regression line is shown in red, and the
regression line after removing the outlier is shown in blue. Center: The residual
plot clearly identifies the outlier. Right: The outlier has a studentized residual of
6; typically we expect values between −3 and 3.


of Figure 3.11 displays the residual plot after transforming the response
using log Y . The residuals now appear to have constant variance, though
there is some evidence of a slight non-linear relationship in the data.
  Sometimes we have a good idea of the variance of each response. For
example, the ith response could be an average of ni raw observations. If
each of these raw observations is uncorrelated with variance σ 2 , then their
average has variance σi2 = σ 2 /ni . In this case a simple remedy is to fit our
model by weighted least squares, with weights proportional to the inverse
                                                                                weighted
variances—i.e. wi = ni in this case. Most linear regression software allows least squares
for observation weights.


4. Outliers
An outlier is a point for which yi is far from the value predicted by the
                                                                                  outlier
model. Outliers can arise for a variety of reasons, such as incorrect recording
of an observation during data collection.
   The red point (observation 20) in the left-hand panel of Figure 3.12
illustrates a typical outlier. The red solid line is the least squares regression
fit, while the blue dashed line is the least squares fit after removal of the
outlier. In this case, removing the outlier has little eﬀect on the least squares
line: it leads to almost no change in the slope, and a miniscule reduction
in the intercept. It is typical for an outlier that does not have an unusual
predictor value to have little eﬀect on the least squares fit. However, even
if an outlier does not have much eﬀect on the least squares fit, it can cause
other problems. For instance, in this example, the RSE is 1.09 when the
outlier is included in the regression, but it is only 0.77 when the outlier
is removed. Since the RSE is used to compute all confidence intervals and
p-values, such a dramatic increase caused by a single data point can have
implications for the interpretation of the fit. Similarly, inclusion of the
outlier causes the R2 to decline from 0.892 to 0.805.
98             3. Linear Regression

                                          41            2                                                   5         20
                                                                                                            4




                                                                                    Studentized Residuals
     10                                                 1
                                                                                                            3                             41
                         20
                                                   X2   0                                                   2
Y    5
                                                                                                            1
                                                        −1
     0                                                                                                      0

                                                        −2                                                  −1


          −2    −1   0        1   2   3        4             −2   −1   0    1   2                                0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25

                          X                                            X1                                                   Leverage




FIGURE 3.13. Left: Observation 41 is a high leverage point, while 20 is not.
The red line is the fit to all the data, and the blue line is the fit with observation
41 removed. Center: The red observation is not unusual in terms of its X1 value
or its X2 value, but still falls outside the bulk of the data, and hence has high
leverage. Right: Observation 41 has a high leverage and a high residual.

   Residual plots can be used to identify outliers. In this example, the out-
lier is clearly visible in the residual plot illustrated in the center panel of
Figure 3.12. But in practice, it can be diﬃcult to decide how large a resid-
ual needs to be before we consider the point to be an outlier. To address
this problem, instead of plotting the residuals, we can plot the studentized
residuals, computed by dividing each residual ei by its estimated standard
                                                                                studentized
error. Observations whose studentized residuals are greater than 3 in abso- residual
lute value are possible outliers. In the right-hand panel of Figure 3.12, the
outlier’s studentized residual exceeds 6, while all other observations have
studentized residuals between −2 and 2.
   If we believe that an outlier has occurred due to an error in data collec-
tion or recording, then one solution is to simply remove the observation.
However, care should be taken, since an outlier may instead indicate a
deficiency with the model, such as a missing predictor.

5. High Leverage Points
We just saw that outliers are observations for which the response yi is
unusual given the predictor xi . In contrast, observations with high leverage
                                                                              high
have an unusual value for xi . For example, observation 41 in the left-hand leverage
panel of Figure 3.13 has high leverage, in that the predictor value for this
observation is large relative to the other observations. (Note that the data
displayed in Figure 3.13 are the same as the data displayed in Figure 3.12,
but with the addition of a single high leverage observation.) The red solid
line is the least squares fit to the data, while the blue dashed line is the
fit produced when observation 41 is removed. Comparing the left-hand
panels of Figures 3.12 and 3.13, we observe that removing the high leverage
observation has a much more substantial impact on the least squares line
than removing the outlier. In fact, high leverage observations tend to have
a sizable impact on the estimated regression line. It is cause for concern if
                       3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model       99

the least squares line is heavily aﬀected by just a couple of observations,
because any problems with these points may invalidate the entire fit. For
this reason, it is important to identify high leverage observations.
   In a simple linear regression, high leverage observations are fairly easy to
identify, since we can simply look for observations for which the predictor
value is outside of the normal range of the observations. But in a multiple
linear regression with many predictors, it is possible to have an observation
that is well within the range of each individual predictor’s values, but that
is unusual in terms of the full set of predictors. An example is shown in
the center panel of Figure 3.13, for a data set with two predictors, X1 and
X2 . Most of the observations’ predictor values fall within the blue dashed
ellipse, but the red observation is well outside of this range. But neither its
value for X1 nor its value for X2 is unusual. So if we examine just X1 or
just X2 , we will fail to notice this high leverage point. This problem is more
pronounced in multiple regression settings with more than two predictors,
because then there is no simple way to plot all dimensions of the data
simultaneously.
   In order to quantify an observation’s leverage, we compute the leverage
statistic. A large value of this statistic indicates an observation with high
                                                                                leverage
leverage. For a simple linear regression,                                       statistic

                                1      (xi − x̄)2
                         hi =     + )n               2
                                                       .                  (3.37)
                                n    i′ =1 (xi − x̄)
                                              ′



It is clear from this equation that hi increases with the distance of xi from x̄.
There is a simple extension of hi to the case of multiple predictors, though
we do not provide the formula here. The leverage statistic hi is always
between 1/n and 1, and the average leverage for all the observations is
always equal to (p + 1)/n. So if a given observation has a leverage statistic
that greatly exceeds (p+1)/n, then we may suspect that the corresponding
point has high leverage.
   The right-hand panel of Figure 3.13 provides a plot of the studentized
residuals versus hi for the data in the left-hand panel of Figure 3.13. Ob-
servation 41 stands out as having a very high leverage statistic as well as a
high studentized residual. In other words, it is an outlier as well as a high
leverage observation. This is a particularly dangerous combination! This
plot also reveals the reason that observation 20 had relatively little eﬀect
on the least squares fit in Figure 3.12: it has low leverage.

6. Collinearity
Collinearity refers to the situation in which two or more predictor variables
                                                                               collinearity
are closely related to one another. The concept of collinearity is illustrated
in Figure 3.14 using the Credit data set. In the left-hand panel of Fig-
ure 3.14, the two predictors limit and age appear to have no obvious rela-
tionship. In contrast, in the right-hand panel of Figure 3.14, the predictors
100         3. Linear Regression



       80
                                                          800
       70

       60                                                 600
Age                                             Rating
       50
                                                          400
       40

       30                                                 200



            2000 4000 6000 8000         12000                   2000 4000 6000 8000                12000

                         Limit                                                      Limit



FIGURE 3.14. Scatterplots of the observations from the Credit data set. Left:
A plot of age versus limit. These two variables are not collinear. Right: A plot
of rating versus limit. There is high collinearity.


                                                           5
                        21.8
       0                                                         21
                                                                   .8
                         21.5                              4
       −1
                         21.25
                                                           3                 21
                                                                               .5

βAge                                            βRating
       −2
                                                           2
       −3
                                                           1
       −4
                                                           0

       −5

               0.16   0.17       0.18    0.19                         −0.1      0.0          0.1      0.2

                         βLimit                                                     βLimit

FIGURE 3.15. Contour plots for the RSS values as a function of the parameters
β for various regressions involving the Credit data set. In each plot, the black
dots represent the coeﬃcient values corresponding to the minimum RSS. Left:
A contour plot of RSS for the regression of balance onto age and limit. The
minimum value is well defined. Right: A contour plot of RSS for the regression
of balance onto rating and limit. Because of the collinearity, there are many
pairs (βLimit , βRating ) with a similar value for RSS.


limit and rating are very highly correlated with each other, and we say
that they are collinear. The presence of collinearity can pose problems in
the regression context, since it can be diﬃcult to separate out the indi-
vidual eﬀects of collinear variables on the response. In other words, since
limit and rating tend to increase or decrease together, it can be diﬃcult to
determine how each one separately is associated with the response, balance.
                    3.3 Other Considerations in the Regression Model   101

   Figure 3.15 illustrates some of the diﬃculties that can result from collinear-
ity. The left-hand panel of Figure 3.15 is a contour plot of the RSS (3.22)
associated with diﬀerent possible coeﬃcient estimates for the regression
of balance on limit and age. Each ellipse represents a set of coeﬃcients
that correspond to the same RSS, with ellipses nearest to the center tak-
ing on the lowest values of RSS. The black dots and associated dashed
lines represent the coeﬃcient estimates that result in the smallest possible
RSS—in other words, these are the least squares estimates. The axes for
limit and age have been scaled so that the plot includes possible coeﬃ-
cient estimates that are up to four standard errors on either side of the
least squares estimates. Thus the plot includes all plausible values for the
coeﬃcients. For example, we see that the true limit coeﬃcient is almost
certainly somewhere between 0.15 and 0.20.
   In contrast, the right-hand panel of Figure 3.15 displays contour plots
of the RSS associated with possible coeﬃcient estimates for the regression
of balance onto limit and rating, which we know to be highly collinear.
Now the contours run along a narrow valley; there is a broad range of
values for the coeﬃcient estimates that result in equal values for RSS.
Hence a small change in the data could cause the pair of coeﬃcient values
that yield the smallest RSS—that is, the least squares estimates—to move
anywhere along this valley. This results in a great deal of uncertainty in the
coeﬃcient estimates. Notice that the scale for the limit coeﬃcient now runs
from roughly −0.2 to 0.2; this is an eight-fold increase over the plausible
range of the limit coeﬃcient in the regression with age. Interestingly, even
though the limit and rating coeﬃcients now have much more individual
uncertainty, they will almost certainly lie somewhere in this contour valley.
For example, we would not expect the true value of the limit and rating
coeﬃcients to be −0.1 and 1 respectively, even though such a value is
plausible for each coeﬃcient individually.
   Since collinearity reduces the accuracy of the estimates of the regression
coeﬃcients, it causes the standard error for β̂j to grow. Recall that the
t-statistic for each predictor is calculated by dividing β̂j by its standard
error. Consequently, collinearity results in a decline in the t-statistic. As a
result, in the presence of collinearity, we may fail to reject H0 : βj = 0. This
means that the power of the hypothesis test—the probability of correctly power
detecting a non-zero coeﬃcient—is reduced by collinearity.
   Table 3.11 compares the coeﬃcient estimates obtained from two separate
multiple regression models. The first is a regression of balance on age and
limit, and the second is a regression of balance on rating and limit. In the
first regression, both age and limit are highly significant with very small p-
values. In the second, the collinearity between limit and rating has caused
the standard error for the limit coeﬃcient estimate to increase by a factor
of 12 and the p-value to increase to 0.701. In other words, the importance
of the limit variable has been masked due to the presence of collinearity.
102     3. Linear Regression

                           Coeﬃcient       Std. error      t-statistic    p-value
              Intercept     −173.411          43.828          −3.957     < 0.0001
  Model 1     age             −2.292            0.672         −3.407       0.0007
              limit            0.173            0.005          34.496    < 0.0001
              Intercept     −377.537          45.254          −8.343     < 0.0001
  Model 2     rating           2.202            0.952           2.312      0.0213
              limit            0.025            0.064           0.384      0.7012
TABLE 3.11. The results for two multiple regression models involving the
Credit data set are shown. Model 1 is a regression of balance on age and limit,
and Model 2 a regression of balance on rating and limit. The standard error
of β̂limit increases 12-fold in the second regression, due to collinearity.

To avoid such a situation, it is desirable to identify and address potential
collinearity problems while fitting the model.
   A simple way to detect collinearity is to look at the correlation matrix
of the predictors. An element of this matrix that is large in absolute value
indicates a pair of highly correlated variables, and therefore a collinearity
problem in the data. Unfortunately, not all collinearity problems can be
detected by inspection of the correlation matrix: it is possible for collinear-
ity to exist between three or more variables even if no pair of variables
has a particularly high correlation. We call this situation multicollinearity.
                                                                                multi-
Instead of inspecting the correlation matrix, a better way to assess multi- collinearity
collinearity is to compute the variance inflation factor (VIF). The VIF is
                                                                                variance
the ratio of the variance of β̂j when fitting the full model divided by the inflation
variance of β̂j if fit on its own. The smallest possible value for VIF is 1, factor
which indicates the complete absence of collinearity. Typically in practice
there is a small amount of collinearity among the predictors. As a rule of
thumb, a VIF value that exceeds 5 or 10 indicates a problematic amount of
collinearity. The VIF for each variable can be computed using the formula
                                              1
                           VIF(β̂j ) =        2        ,
                                         1 − RX j |X−j

          2
where RX    j |X−j
                    is the R2 from a regression of Xj onto all of the other
                   2
predictors. If RX    j |X−j
                            is close to one, then collinearity is present, and so
the VIF will be large.
   In the Credit data, a regression of balance on age, rating, and limit
indicates that the predictors have VIF values of 1.01, 160.67, and 160.59.
As we suspected, there is considerable collinearity in the data!
   When faced with the problem of collinearity, there are two simple solu-
tions. The first is to drop one of the problematic variables from the regres-
sion. This can usually be done without much compromise to the regression
fit, since the presence of collinearity implies that the information that this
variable provides about the response is redundant in the presence of the
other variables. For instance, if we regress balance onto age and limit,
                                             3.4 The Marketing Plan      103

without the rating predictor, then the resulting VIF values are close to
the minimum possible value of 1, and the R2 drops from 0.754 to 0.75.
So dropping rating from the set of predictors has eﬀectively solved the
collinearity problem without compromising the fit. The second solution is
to combine the collinear variables together into a single predictor. For in-
stance, we might take the average of standardized versions of limit and
rating in order to create a new variable that measures credit worthiness.



3.4 The Marketing Plan
We now briefly return to the seven questions about the Advertising data
that we set out to answer at the beginning of this chapter.


  1. Is there a relationship between sales and advertising budget?
     This question can be answered by fitting a multiple regression model
     of sales onto TV, radio, and newspaper, as in (3.20), and testing the
     hypothesis H0 : βTV = βradio = βnewspaper = 0. In Section 3.2.2,
     we showed that the F -statistic can be used to determine whether
     or not we should reject this null hypothesis. In this case the p-value
     corresponding to the F -statistic in Table 3.6 is very low, indicating
     clear evidence of a relationship between advertising and sales.

  2. How strong is the relationship?
     We discussed two measures of model accuracy in Section 3.1.3. First,
     the RSE estimates the standard deviation of the response from the
     population regression line. For the Advertising data, the RSE is 1.69
     units while the mean value for the response is 14.022, indicating a
     percentage error of roughly 12 %. Second, the R2 statistic records
     the percentage of variability in the response that is explained by
     the predictors. The predictors explain almost 90 % of the variance in
     sales. The RSE and R2 statistics are displayed in Table 3.6.

  3. Which media are associated with sales?
     To answer this question, we can examine the p-values associated with
     each predictor’s t-statistic (Section 3.1.2). In the multiple linear re-
     gression displayed in Table 3.4, the p-values for TV and radio are low,
     but the p-value for newspaper is not. This suggests that only TV and
     radio are related to sales. In Chapter 6 we explore this question in
     greater detail.

  4. How large is the association between each medium and sales?
     We saw in Section 3.1.2 that the standard error of β̂j can be used to
     construct confidence intervals for βj . For the Advertising data, we
104     3. Linear Regression

      can use the results in Table 3.4 to compute the 95 % confidence inter-
      vals for the coeﬃcients in a multiple regression model using all three
      media budgets as predictors. The confidence intervals are as follows:
      (0.043, 0.049) for TV, (0.172, 0.206) for radio, and (−0.013, 0.011) for
      newspaper. The confidence intervals for TV and radio are narrow and
      far from zero, providing evidence that these media are related to
      sales. But the interval for newspaper includes zero, indicating that
      the variable is not statistically significant given the values of TV and
      radio.
      We saw in Section 3.3.3 that collinearity can result in very wide stan-
      dard errors. Could collinearity be the reason that the confidence in-
      terval associated with newspaper is so wide? The VIF scores are 1.005,
      1.145, and 1.145 for TV, radio, and newspaper, suggesting no evidence
      of collinearity.
      In order to assess the association of each medium individually on
      sales, we can perform three separate simple linear regressions. Re-
      sults are shown in Tables 3.1 and 3.3. There is evidence of an ex-
      tremely strong association between TV and sales and between radio
      and sales. There is evidence of a mild association between newspaper
      and sales, when the values of TV and radio are ignored.

  5. How accurately can we predict future sales?
     The response can be predicted using (3.21). The accuracy associ-
     ated with this estimate depends on whether we wish to predict an
     individual response, Y = f (X) + ϵ, or the average response, f (X)
     (Section 3.2.2). If the former, we use a prediction interval, and if the
     latter, we use a confidence interval. Prediction intervals will always
     be wider than confidence intervals because they account for the un-
     certainty associated with ϵ, the irreducible error.

  6. Is the relationship linear?
     In Section 3.3.3, we saw that residual plots can be used in order to
     identify non-linearity. If the relationships are linear, then the residual
     plots should display no pattern. In the case of the Advertising data,
     we observe a non-linear eﬀect in Figure 3.5, though this eﬀect could
     also be observed in a residual plot. In Section 3.3.2, we discussed the
     inclusion of transformations of the predictors in the linear regression
     model in order to accommodate non-linear relationships.

  7. Is there synergy among the advertising media?
     The standard linear regression model assumes an additive relation-
     ship between the predictors and the response. An additive model
     is easy to interpret because the association between each predictor
     and the response is unrelated to the values of the other predictors.
     However, the additive assumption may be unrealistic for certain data
        3.5 Comparison of Linear Regression with K-Nearest Neighbors       105

      sets. In Section 3.3.2, we showed how to include an interaction term
      in the regression model in order to accommodate non-additive rela-
      tionships. A small p-value associated with the interaction term indi-
      cates the presence of such relationships. Figure 3.5 suggested that the
      Advertising data may not be additive. Including an interaction term
      in the model results in a substantial increase in R2 , from around 90 %
      to almost 97 %.


3.5 Comparison of Linear Regression
    with K-Nearest Neighbors
As discussed in Chapter 2, linear regression is an example of a parametric
approach because it assumes a linear functional form for f (X). Parametric
methods have several advantages. They are often easy to fit, because one
need estimate only a small number of coeﬃcients. In the case of linear re-
gression, the coeﬃcients have simple interpretations, and tests of statistical
significance can be easily performed. But parametric methods do have a
disadvantage: by construction, they make strong assumptions about the
form of f (X). If the specified functional form is far from the truth, and
prediction accuracy is our goal, then the parametric method will perform
poorly. For instance, if we assume a linear relationship between X and Y
but the true relationship is far from linear, then the resulting model will
provide a poor fit to the data, and any conclusions drawn from it will be
suspect.
   In contrast, non-parametric methods do not explicitly assume a para-
metric form for f (X), and thereby provide an alternative and more flexi-
ble approach for performing regression. We discuss various non-parametric
methods in this book. Here we consider one of the simplest and best-known
non-parametric methods, K-nearest neighbors regression (KNN regression).
                                                                                K-nearest
The KNN regression method is closely related to the KNN classifier dis- neighbors
cussed in Chapter 2. Given a value for K and a prediction point x0 , KNN regression
regression first identifies the K training observations that are closest to
x0 , represented by N0 . It then estimates f (x0 ) using the average of all the
training responses in N0 . In other words,
                                       1 0
                             fˆ(x0 ) =         yi .
                                       K
                                         xi ∈N0

 Figure 3.16 illustrates two KNN fits on a data set with p = 2 predictors.
The fit with K = 1 is shown in the left-hand panel, while the right-hand
panel corresponds to K = 9. We see that when K = 1, the KNN fit perfectly
interpolates the training observations, and consequently takes the form of
a step function. When K = 9, the KNN fit still is a step function, but
averaging over nine observations results in much smaller regions of constant
106     3. Linear Regression




y                                         y
                                          y
 y                                            y




                                  x2                                        x2

               x1                                        x1



FIGURE 3.16. Plots of fˆ(X) using KNN regression on a two-dimensional data
set with 64 observations (orange dots). Left: K = 1 results in a rough step func-
tion fit. Right: K = 9 produces a much smoother fit.


prediction, and consequently a smoother fit. In general, the optimal value
for K will depend on the bias-variance tradeoﬀ, which we introduced in
Chapter 2. A small value for K provides the most flexible fit, which will
have low bias but high variance. This variance is due to the fact that the
prediction in a given region is entirely dependent on just one observation.
In contrast, larger values of K provide a smoother and less variable fit; the
prediction in a region is an average of several points, and so changing one
observation has a smaller eﬀect. However, the smoothing may cause bias by
masking some of the structure in f (X). In Chapter 5, we introduce several
approaches for estimating test error rates. These methods can be used to
identify the optimal value of K in KNN regression.
   In what setting will a parametric approach such as least squares linear re-
gression outperform a non-parametric approach such as KNN regression?
The answer is simple: the parametric approach will outperform the non-
parametric approach if the parametric form that has been selected is close
to the true form of f . Figure 3.17 provides an example with data generated
from a one-dimensional linear regression model. The black solid lines rep-
resent f (X), while the blue curves correspond to the KNN fits using K = 1
and K = 9. In this case, the K = 1 predictions are far too variable, while
the smoother K = 9 fit is much closer to f (X). However, since the true
relationship is linear, it is hard for a non-parametric approach to compete
with linear regression: a non-parametric approach incurs a cost in variance
that is not oﬀset by a reduction in bias. The blue dashed line in the left-
hand panel of Figure 3.18 represents the linear regression fit to the same
data. It is almost perfect. The right-hand panel of Figure 3.18 reveals that
linear regression outperforms KNN for this data. The green solid line, plot-
        3.5 Comparison of Linear Regression with K-Nearest Neighbors       107

ted as a function of 1/K, represents the test set mean squared error (MSE)
for KNN. The KNN errors are well above the black dashed line, which is
the test MSE for linear regression. When the value of K is large, then KNN
performs only a little worse than least squares regression in terms of MSE.
It performs far worse when K is small.
   In practice, the true relationship between X and Y is rarely exactly lin-
ear. Figure 3.19 examines the relative performances of least squares regres-
sion and KNN under increasing levels of non-linearity in the relationship
between X and Y . In the top row, the true relationship is nearly linear.
In this case we see that the test MSE for linear regression is still superior
to that of KNN for low values of K. However, for K ≥ 4, KNN out-
performs linear regression. The second row illustrates a more substantial
deviation from linearity. In this situation, KNN substantially outperforms
linear regression for all values of K. Note that as the extent of non-linearity
increases, there is little change in the test set MSE for the non-parametric
KNN method, but there is a large increase in the test set MSE of linear
regression.
   Figures 3.18 and 3.19 display situations in which KNN performs slightly
worse than linear regression when the relationship is linear, but much bet-
ter than linear regression for non-linear situations. In a real life situation
in which the true relationship is unknown, one might suspect that KNN
should be favored over linear regression because it will at worst be slightly
inferior to linear regression if the true relationship is linear, and may give
substantially better results if the true relationship is non-linear. But in re-
ality, even when the true relationship is highly non-linear, KNN may still
provide inferior results to linear regression. In particular, both Figures 3.18
and 3.19 illustrate settings with p = 1 predictor. But in higher dimensions,
KNN often performs worse than linear regression.
   Figure 3.20 considers the same strongly non-linear situation as in the
second row of Figure 3.19, except that we have added additional noise
predictors that are not associated with the response. When p = 1 or p = 2,
KNN outperforms linear regression. But for p = 3 the results are mixed,
and for p ≥ 4 linear regression is superior to KNN. In fact, the increase in
dimension has only caused a small deterioration in the linear regression test
set MSE, but it has caused more than a ten-fold increase in the MSE for
KNN. This decrease in performance as the dimension increases is a common
problem for KNN, and results from the fact that in higher dimensions
there is eﬀectively a reduction in sample size. In this data set there are
50 training observations; when p = 1, this provides enough information to
accurately estimate f (X). However, spreading 50 observations over p = 20
dimensions results in a phenomenon in which a given observation has no
nearby neighbors—this is the so-called curse of dimensionality. That is,
                                                                                curse of di-
the K observations that are nearest to a given test observation x0 may be mensionality
very far away from x0 in p-dimensional space when p is large, leading to a
very poor prediction of f (x0 ) and hence a poor KNN fit. As a general rule,
108         3. Linear Regression



      4
                                                                 4



      3                                                          3



y     2
                                           y                     2




      1                                                          1




          −1.0   −0.5   0.0   0.5    1.0                                −1.0   −0.5   0.0     0.5   1.0

                        x                                                             x

FIGURE 3.17. Plots of fˆ(X) using KNN regression on a one-dimensional data
set with 50 observations. The true relationship is given by the black solid line.
Left: The blue curve corresponds to K = 1 and interpolates (i.e. passes directly
through) the training data. Right: The blue curve corresponds to K = 9, and
represents a smoother fit.



      4



                                                                 0.15
      3




                                            Mean Squared Error
y                                                                0.10
      2



                                                                 0.05
      1


                                                                 0.00

          −1.0   −0.5   0.0   0.5    1.0                                        0.2         0.5     1.0

                        x                                                             1/K


FIGURE 3.18. The same data set shown in Figure 3.17 is investigated further.
Left: The blue dashed line is the least squares fit to the data. Since f (X) is in
fact linear (displayed as the black line), the least squares regression line provides
a very good estimate of f (X). Right: The dashed horizontal line represents the
least squares test set MSE, while the green solid line corresponds to the MSE
for KNN as a function of 1/K (on the log scale). Linear regression achieves a
lower test MSE than does KNN regression, since f (X) is in fact linear. For KNN
regression, the best results occur with a very large value of K, corresponding to a
small value of 1/K.
             3.5 Comparison of Linear Regression with K-Nearest Neighbors                 109




    3.5
                                                                 0.08

    3.0

                                                                 0.06




                                            Mean Squared Error
    2.5

y
    2.0                                                          0.04


    1.5
                                                                 0.02
    1.0

                                                                 0.00
    0.5
          −1.0   −0.5    0.0    0.5   1.0                               0.2         0.5   1.0

                         x                                                    1/K




                                                                 0.15
    3.5


    3.0




                                            Mean Squared Error
                                                                 0.10
    2.5
y
    2.0
                                                                 0.05
    1.5


    1.0
                                                                 0.00

          −1.0   −0.5    0.0    0.5   1.0                               0.2         0.5   1.0

                         x                                                    1/K


FIGURE 3.19. Top Left: In a setting with a slightly non-linear relationship
between X and Y (solid black line), the KNN fits with K = 1 (blue) and K = 9
(red) are displayed. Top Right: For the slightly non-linear data, the test set MSE
for least squares regression (horizontal black) and KN N with various values of
1/K (green) are displayed. Bottom Left and Bottom Right: As in the top panel,
but with a strongly non-linear relationship between X and Y .
110                          3. Linear Regression

                              p=1                   p=2                   p=3                   p=4                   p=10                  p=20
                      1.0                   1.0                   1.0                   1.0                   1.0                   1.0




 Mean Squared Error
                      0.8                   0.8                   0.8                   0.8                   0.8                   0.8


                      0.6                   0.6                   0.6                   0.6                   0.6                   0.6


                      0.4                   0.4                   0.4                   0.4                   0.4                   0.4


                      0.2                   0.2                   0.2                   0.2                   0.2                   0.2


                      0.0                   0.0                   0.0                   0.0                   0.0                   0.0

                            0.2   0.5 1.0         0.2   0.5 1.0         0.2   0.5 1.0         0.2   0.5 1.0         0.2   0.5 1.0         0.2   0.5 1.0

                                                                                    1/K


FIGURE 3.20. Test MSE for linear regression (black dashed lines) and KNN
(green curves) as the number of variables p increases. The true function is non–
linear in the first variable, as in the lower panel in Figure 3.19, and does not
depend on the additional variables. The performance of linear regression deteri-
orates slowly in the presence of these additional noise variables, whereas KNN’s
performance degrades much more quickly as p increases.

parametric methods will tend to outperform non-parametric approaches
when there is a small number of observations per predictor.
   Even when the dimension is small, we might prefer linear regression to
KNN from an interpretability standpoint. If the test MSE of KNN is only
slightly lower than that of linear regression, we might be willing to forego
a little bit of prediction accuracy for the sake of a simple model that can
be described in terms of just a few coeﬃcients, and for which p-values are
available.



3.6 Lab: Linear Regression
3.6.1 Libraries
The library() function is used to load libraries, or groups of functions
                                                                             library()
and data sets that are not included in the base R distribution. Basic func-
tions that perform least squares linear regression and other simple analyses
come standard with the base distribution, but more exotic functions require
additional libraries. Here we load the MASS package, which is a very large
collection of data sets and functions. We also load the ISLR2 package, which
includes the data sets associated with this book.
> library ( MASS )
> library ( ISLR2 )

   If you receive an error message when loading any of these libraries, it
likely indicates that the corresponding library has not yet been installed
on your system. Some libraries, such as MASS, come with R and do not need to
be separately installed on your computer. However, other packages, such as
                                            3.6 Lab: Linear Regression   111

ISLR2, must be downloaded the first time they are used. This can be done di-
rectly from within R. For example, on a Windows system, select the Install
package option under the Packages tab. After you select any mirror site, a
list of available packages will appear. Simply select the package you wish
to install and R will automatically download the package. Alternatively,
this can be done at the R command line via install.packages("ISLR2").
This installation only needs to be done the first time you use a package.
However, the library() function must be called within each R session.


3.6.2 Simple Linear Regression
The ISLR2 library contains the Boston data set, which records medv (me-
dian house value) for 506 census tracts in Boston. We will seek to predict
medv using 12 predictors such as rm (average number of rooms per house),
age (average age of houses), and lstat (percent of households with low
socioeconomic status).
> head ( Boston )
     crim zn indus chas       nox      rm    age      dis rad tax
1 0.00632 18 2.31     0     0.538   6.575   65.2   4.0900   1 296
2 0.02731 0 7.07      0     0.469   6.421   78.9   4.9671   2 242
3 0.02729 0 7.07      0     0.469   7.185   61.1   4.9671   2 242
4 0.03237 0 2.18      0     0.458   6.998   45.8   6.0622   3 222
5 0.06905 0 2.18      0     0.458   7.147   54.2   6.0622   3 222
6 0.02985 0 2.18      0     0.458   6.430   58.7   6.0622   3 222
  ptratio lstat medv
1    15.3 4.98 24.0
2    17.8 9.14 21.6
3    17.8 4.03 34.7
4    18.7 2.94 33.4
5    18.7 5.33 36.2
6    18.7 5.21 28.7

To find out more about the data set, we can type ?Boston.
  We will start by using the lm() function to fit a simple linear regression
                                                                             lm()
model, with medv as the response and lstat as the predictor. The basic
syntax is lm(y ∼ x, data), where y is the response, x is the predictor, and
data is the data set in which these two variables are kept.
> lm . fit <- lm ( medv ∼ lstat )
Error in eval ( expr , envir , enclos ) : Object " medv " not found

The command causes an error because R does not know where to find
the variables medv and lstat. The next line tells R that the variables are
in Boston. If we attach Boston, the first line works fine because R now
recognizes the variables.
> lm . fit <- lm ( medv ∼ lstat , data = Boston )
> attach ( Boston )
> lm . fit <- lm ( medv ∼ lstat )
112     3. Linear Regression

  If we type lm.fit, some basic information about the model is output.
For more detailed information, we use summary(lm.fit). This gives us p-
values and standard errors for the coeﬃcients, as well as the R2 statistic
and F -statistic for the model.
> lm . fit

Call :
lm ( formula = medv ∼ lstat )

Coefficients :
( Intercept )            lstat
       34.55             -0.95

> summary ( lm . fit )

Call :
lm ( formula = medv ∼ lstat )

Residuals :
   Min      1 Q Median         3Q     Max
-15.17  -3.99    -1.32       2.03   24.50

Coefficients :
              Estimate Std . Error t value Pr ( >| t |)
( Intercept ) 34.5538       0.5626    61.4    <2e -16 ***
lstat          -0.9500      0.0387   -24.5    <2e -16 ***
---
Signif . codes : 0 *** 0.001 ** 0.01 * 0.05 . 0.1       1

Residual standard error : 6.22 on 504 degrees of freedom
Multiple R - squared : 0.544 ,    Adjusted R - squared : 0.543
F - statistic : 602 on 1 and 504 DF , p - value : < 2e -16

We can use the names() function in order to find out what other pieces
                                                                         names()
of information are stored in lm.fit. Although we can extract these quan-
tities by name—e.g. lm.fit$coefficients—it is safer to use the extractor
functions like coef() to access them.
                                                                               coef()
> names ( lm . fit )
  [1] " coefficients " " residuals "          " effects "
  [4] " rank "          " fitted . values "   " assign "
  [7] " qr "            " df . residual "     " xlevels "
[10] " call "           " terms "             " model "
> coef ( lm . fit )
( Intercept )        lstat
        34.55        -0.95

In order to obtain a confidence interval for the coeﬃcient estimates, we can
use the confint() command.
                                                                               confint()
> confint ( lm . fit )
               2.5 % 97.5 %
( Intercept ) 33.45 35.659
                                              3.6 Lab: Linear Regression   113

lstat           -1.03 -0.874

The predict() function can be used to produce confidence intervals and
                                                                            predict()
prediction intervals for the prediction of medv for a given value of lstat.
> predict ( lm . fit , data . frame ( lstat = ( c (5 , 10 , 15) ) ) ,
    interval = " confidence " )
    fit     lwr      upr
1 29.80 29.01 30.60
2 25.05 24.47 25.63
3 20.30 19.73 20.87
> predict ( lm . fit , data . frame ( lstat = ( c (5 , 10 , 15) ) ) ,
    interval = " prediction " )
    fit      lwr      upr
1 29.80 17.566 42.04
2 25.05 12.828 37.28
3 20.30 8.078 32.53

For instance, the 95 % confidence interval associated with a lstat value of
10 is (24.47, 25.63), and the 95 % prediction interval is (12.828, 37.28). As
expected, the confidence and prediction intervals are centered around the
same point (a predicted value of 25.05 for medv when lstat equals 10), but
the latter are substantially wider.
   We will now plot medv and lstat along with the least squares regression
line using the plot() and abline() functions.
                                                                                  abline()
> plot ( lstat , medv )
> abline ( lm . fit )

There is some evidence for non-linearity in the relationship between lstat
and medv. We will explore this issue later in this lab.
  The abline() function can be used to draw any line, not just the least
squares regression line. To draw a line with intercept a and slope b, we
type abline(a, b). Below we experiment with some additional settings for
plotting lines and points. The lwd = 3 command causes the width of the
regression line to be increased by a factor of 3; this works for the plot() and
lines() functions also. We can also use the pch option to create diﬀerent
plotting symbols.
>   abline ( lm . fit , lwd = 3)
>   abline ( lm . fit , lwd = 3 , col = " red " )
>   plot ( lstat , medv , col = " red " )
>   plot ( lstat , medv , pch = 20)
>   plot ( lstat , medv , pch = " + " )
>   plot (1:20 , 1:20 , pch = 1:20)

  Next we examine some diagnostic plots, several of which were discussed
in Section 3.3.3. Four diagnostic plots are automatically produced by ap-
plying the plot() function directly to the output from lm(). In general, this
command will produce one plot at a time, and hitting Enter will generate
the next plot. However, it is often convenient to view all four plots together.
We can achieve this by using the par() and mfrow() functions, which tell R
                                                                                  par()
                                                                                  mfrow()
114      3. Linear Regression

to split the display screen into separate panels so that multiple plots can
be viewed simultaneously. For example, par(mfrow = c(2, 2)) divides the
plotting region into a 2 × 2 grid of panels.
> par ( mfrow = c (2 , 2) )
> plot ( lm . fit )

Alternatively, we can compute the residuals from a linear regression fit
using the residuals() function. The function rstudent() will return the
                                                                          residuals()
studentized residuals, and we can use this function to plot the residuals rstudent()
against the fitted values.
> plot ( predict ( lm . fit ) , residuals ( lm . fit ) )
> plot ( predict ( lm . fit ) , rstudent ( lm . fit ) )

On the basis of the residual plots, there is some evidence of non-linearity.
Leverage statistics can be computed for any number of predictors using the
hatvalues() function.
                                                                               hatvalues()
> plot ( hatvalues ( lm . fit ) )
> which . max ( hatvalues ( lm . fit ) )
375

The which.max() function identifies the index of the largest element of a
                                                                             which.max()
vector. In this case, it tells us which observation has the largest leverage
statistic.


3.6.3 Multiple Linear Regression
In order to fit a multiple linear regression model using least squares, we
again use the lm() function. The syntax lm(y ∼ x1 + x2 + x3) is used to
fit a model with three predictors, x1, x2, and x3. The summary() function
now outputs the regression coeﬃcients for all the predictors.
> lm . fit <- lm ( medv ∼ lstat + age , data = Boston )
> summary ( lm . fit )

Call :
lm ( formula = medv ∼ lstat + age , data = Boston )

Residuals :
   Min      1 Q Median          3Q      Max
-15.98  -3.98    -1.28        1.97    23.16

Coefficients :
              Estimate Std . Error t value Pr ( >| t |)
( Intercept ) 33.2228       0.7308   45.46    <2e -16 ***
lstat          -1.0321      0.0482  -21.42    <2e -16 ***
age             0.0345      0.0122    2.83    0.0049 **
---
Signif . codes : 0 *** 0.001 ** 0.01 * 0.05 . 0.1 1

Residual standard error : 6.17 on 503 degrees of freedom
                                            3.6 Lab: Linear Regression    115

Multiple R - squared : 0.551 ,    Adjusted R - squared : 0.549
F - statistic : 309 on 2 and 503 DF , p - value : < 2e -16

The Boston data set contains 12 variables, and so it would be cumbersome
to have to type all of these in order to perform a regression using all of the
predictors. Instead, we can use the following short-hand:
> lm . fit <- lm ( medv ∼ . , data = Boston )
> summary ( lm . fit )

Call :
lm ( formula = medv ∼ . , data = Boston )

Residuals :
    Min       1Q     Median        3Q      Max
-15.130   -2.767     -0.581     1.941   26.253

Coefficients :
               Estimate Std . Error t value Pr ( >| t |)
( Intercept ) 41.61727      4.93604    8.43 3.8 e -16        ***
crim           -0.12139     0.03300   -3.68 0.00026          ***
zn              0.04696     0.01388    3.38 0.00077          ***
indus           0.01347     0.06214    0.22 0.82852
chas            2.83999     0.87001    3.26 0.00117          **
nox           -18.75802     3.85135   -4.87 1.5 e -06        ***
rm              3.65812     0.42025    8.70 < 2e -16         ***
age             0.00361     0.01333    0.27 0.78659
dis            -1.49075     0.20162   -7.39 6.2 e -13        ***
rad             0.28940     0.06691    4.33 1.8 e -05        ***
tax            -0.01268     0.00380   -3.34 0.00091          ***
ptratio        -0.93753     0.13221   -7.09 4.6 e -12        ***
lstat          -0.55202     0.05066  -10.90 < 2e -16         ***
---
Signif . codes : 0 *** 0.001 ** 0.01 * 0.05 . 0.1             1

Residual standard error : 4.8 on 493 degrees of freedom
Multiple R - squared : 0.734 ,    Adjusted R - squared : 0.728
F - statistic : 114 on 12 and 493 DF , p - value : < 2e -16

We can access the individual components of a summary object by name
(type ?summary.lm to see what is available). Hence summary(lm.fit)$r.sq
gives us the R2 , and summary(lm.fit)$sigma gives us the RSE. The vif()
                                                                             vif()
function, part of the car package, can be used to compute variance inflation
factors. Most VIF’s are low to moderate for this data. The car package is
not part of the base R installation so it must be downloaded the first time
you use it via the install.packages() function in R.
> library ( car )
> vif ( lm . fit )
   crim            zn  indus     chas       nox       rm       age        dis
   1.77        2.30     3.99     1.07      4.37     1.91      3.09       3.95
    rad          tax ptratio    lstat
   7.45        9.00     1.80     2.87
116     3. Linear Regression

What if we would like to perform a regression using all of the variables but
one? For example, in the above regression output, age has a high p-value.
So we may wish to run a regression excluding this predictor. The following
syntax results in a regression using all predictors except age.
> lm . fit1 <- lm ( medv ∼ . - age , data = Boston )
> summary ( lm . fit1 )
...

Alternatively, the update() function can be used.
                                                                               update()
> lm . fit1 <- update ( lm . fit , ∼ . - age )



3.6.4 Interaction Terms
It is easy to include interaction terms in a linear model using the lm()
function. The syntax lstat:black tells R to include an interaction term be-
tween lstat and black. The syntax lstat * age simultaneously includes
lstat, age, and the interaction term lstat×age as predictors; it is a short-
hand for lstat + age + lstat:age.
> summary ( lm ( medv ∼ lstat * age , data = Boston ) )

Call :
lm ( formula = medv ∼ lstat * age , data = Boston )

Residuals :
   Min      1 Q Median        3Q     Max
-15.81  -4.04    -1.33      2.08   27.55

Coefficients :
               Estimate Std . Error t value Pr ( >| t |)
( Intercept ) 36.088536   1.469835    24.55 < 2e -16 ***
lstat         -1.392117   0.167456    -8.31 8.8 e -16 ***
age           -0.000721   0.019879    -0.04      0.971
lstat : age    0.004156   0.001852     2.24      0.025 *
---
Signif . codes : 0 *** 0.001 ** 0.01 * 0.05 . 0.1        1

Residual standard error : 6.15 on 502 degrees of freedom
Multiple R - squared : 0.556 , Adjusted R - squared : 0.553
F - statistic : 209 on 3 and 502 DF , p - value : < 2e -16



3.6.5 Non-linear Transformations of the Predictors
The lm() function can also accommodate non-linear transformations of the
predictors. For instance, given a predictor X, we can create a predictor X 2
using I(X^2). The function I() is needed since the ^ has a special meaning
                                                                             I()
in a formula object; wrapping as we do allows the standard usage in R,
which is to raise X to the power 2. We now perform a regression of medv
onto lstat and lstat2 .
                                              3.6 Lab: Linear Regression   117

> lm . fit2 <- lm ( medv ∼ lstat + I ( lstat ^2) )
> summary ( lm . fit2 )

Call :
lm ( formula = medv ∼ lstat + I ( lstat ^2) )

Residuals :
   Min      1 Q Median           3Q     Max
-15.28  -3.83    -0.53         2.31   25.41

Coefficients :
              Estimate Std . Error t value Pr ( >| t |)
( Intercept ) 42.86201     0.87208    49.1    <2e -16 ***
lstat         -2.33282     0.12380   -18.8    <2e -16 ***
I ( lstat ^2)  0.04355     0.00375    11.6    <2e -16 ***
---
Signif . codes : 0 *** 0.001 ** 0.01 * 0.05 . 0.1       1

Residual standard error : 5.52 on 503 degrees of freedom
Multiple R - squared : 0.641 , Adjusted R - squared : 0.639
F - statistic : 449 on 2 and 503 DF , p - value : < 2e -16

The near-zero p-value associated with the quadratic term suggests that
it leads to an improved model. We use the anova() function to further
                                                                              anova()
quantify the extent to which the quadratic fit is superior to the linear fit.
> lm . fit <- lm ( medv ∼ lstat )
> anova ( lm . fit , lm . fit2 )
Analysis of Variance Table

Model 1: medv ∼ lstat
Model 2: medv ∼ lstat + I ( lstat ^2)
  Res . Df  RSS Df Sum of Sq    F Pr ( > F )
1     504 19472
2     503 15347 1       4125 135 <2e -16 ***
---
Signif . codes : 0 *** 0.001 ** 0.01 * 0.05 . 0.1               1

Here Model 1 represents the linear submodel containing only one predictor,
lstat, while Model 2 corresponds to the larger quadratic model that has two
predictors, lstat and lstat2 . The anova() function performs a hypothesis
test comparing the two models. The null hypothesis is that the two models
fit the data equally well, and the alternative hypothesis is that the full
model is superior. Here the F -statistic is 135 and the associated p-value is
virtually zero. This provides very clear evidence that the model containing
the predictors lstat and lstat2 is far superior to the model that only
contains the predictor lstat. This is not surprising, since earlier we saw
evidence for non-linearity in the relationship between medv and lstat. If we
type
 > par ( mfrow = c (2 , 2) )
 > plot ( lm . fit2 )
118     3. Linear Regression

then we see that when the lstat2 term is included in the model, there is
little discernible pattern in the residuals.
   In order to create a cubic fit, we can include a predictor of the form
I(X^3). However, this approach can start to get cumbersome for higher-
order polynomials. A better approach involves using the poly() function
                                                                          poly()
to create the polynomial within lm(). For example, the following command
produces a fifth-order polynomial fit:
> lm . fit5 <- lm ( medv ∼ poly ( lstat , 5) )
> summary ( lm . fit5 )

Call :
lm ( formula = medv ∼ poly ( lstat , 5) )

Residuals :
    Min       1Q    Median         3Q      Max
-13.543   -3.104    -0.705      2.084   27.115

Coefficients :
                    Estimate Std . Error t value Pr ( >| t |)
( Intercept )         22.533       0.232   97.20 < 2e -16       ***
poly ( lstat , 5) 1 -152.460       5.215  -29.24 < 2e -16       ***
poly ( lstat , 5) 2   64.227       5.215   12.32 < 2e -16       ***
poly ( lstat , 5) 3 -27.051        5.215   -5.19 3.1 e -07      ***
poly ( lstat , 5) 4   25.452       5.215    4.88 1.4 e -06      ***
poly ( lstat , 5) 5 -19.252        5.215   -3.69 0.00025        ***
---
Signif . codes : 0 *** 0.001 ** 0.01 * 0.05 . 0.1           1

Residual standard error : 5.21 on 500 degrees of freedom
Multiple R - squared : 0.682 , Adjusted R - squared : 0.679
F - statistic : 214 on 5 and 500 DF , p - value : < 2e -16

This suggests that including additional polynomial terms, up to fifth order,
leads to an improvement in the model fit! However, further investigation of
the data reveals that no polynomial terms beyond fifth order have signifi-
cant p-values in a regression fit.
   By default, the poly() function orthogonalizes the predictors: this means
that the features output by this function are not simply a sequence of
powers of the argument. However, a linear model applied to the output
of the poly() function will have the same fitted values as a linear model
applied to the raw polynomials (although the coeﬃcient estimates, standard
errors, and p-values will diﬀer). In order to obtain the raw polynomials from
the poly() function, the argument raw = TRUE must be used.
   Of course, we are in no way restricted to using polynomial transforma-
tions of the predictors. Here we try a log transformation.
> summary ( lm ( medv ∼ log ( rm ) , data = Boston ) )
...
                                           3.6 Lab: Linear Regression   119

3.6.6 Qualitative Predictors
We will now examine the Carseats data, which is part of the ISLR2 library.
We will attempt to predict Sales (child car seat sales) in 400 locations
based on a number of predictors.
> head ( Carseats )
  Sales CompPrice Income Advertising Population Price
1 9.50          138   73          11        276   120
2 11.22         111   48          16        260    83
3 10.06         113   35          10        269    80
4 7.40          117  100            4       466    97
5 4.15          141   64            3       340   128
6 10.81         124  113          13        501    72
  ShelveLoc Age Education Urban US
1         Bad 42       17   Yes Yes
2        Good 65       10   Yes Yes
3    Medium 59         12   Yes Yes
4    Medium 55         14   Yes Yes
5         Bad 38       13   Yes No
6         Bad 78       16    No Yes

The Carseats data includes qualitative predictors such as Shelveloc, an in-
dicator of the quality of the shelving location—that is, the space within
a store in which the car seat is displayed—at each location. The pre-
dictor Shelveloc takes on three possible values: Bad, Medium, and Good.
Given a qualitative variable such as Shelveloc, R generates dummy variables
automatically. Below we fit a multiple regression model that includes some
interaction terms.
> lm . fit <- lm ( Sales ∼ . + Income : Advertising + Price : Age ,
     data = Carseats )
> summary ( lm . fit )

Call :
lm ( formula = Sales ∼ . + Income : Advertising + Price : Age , data =
Carseats )

Residuals :
   Min      1 Q Median        3Q     Max
-2.921 -0.750 0.018        0.675   3.341

Coefficients :
                         Estimate Std . Error t value Pr ( >| t |)
( Intercept )            6.575565   1.008747     6.52 2.2 e -10 ***
CompPrice                0.092937   0.004118    22.57 < 2e -16 ***
Income                   0.010894   0.002604     4.18 3.6 e -05 ***
Advertising              0.070246   0.022609     3.11 0.00203 **
Population               0.000159   0.000368     0.43 0.66533
Price                   -0.100806   0.007440   -13.55 < 2e -16 ***
ShelveLocGood            4.848676   0.152838    31.72 < 2e -16 ***
Shelv eL o cM ed iu m    1.953262   0.125768    15.53 < 2e -16 ***
Age                     -0.057947   0.015951    -3.63 0.00032 ***
120     3. Linear Regression

Education            -0.020852       0.019613      -1.06   0.28836
UrbanYes              0.140160       0.112402       1.25   0.21317
USYes                -0.157557       0.148923      -1.06   0.29073
Income : Advertising 0.000751        0.000278       2.70   0.00729 **
Price : Age           0.000107       0.000133       0.80   0.42381
---
Signif . codes : 0 *** 0.001 **      0.01 * 0.05 . 0.1       1

Residual standard error : 1.01 on 386 degrees of freedom
Multiple R - squared : 0.876 ,    Adjusted R - squared : 0.872
F - statistic : 210 on 13 and 386 DF , p - value : < 2e -16

The contrasts() function returns the coding that R uses for the dummy
                                                                      contrasts()
variables.
> attach ( Carseats )
> contrasts ( ShelveLoc )
       Good Medium
Bad         0       0
Good        1       0
Medium      0       1

Use ?contrasts to learn about other contrasts, and how to set them.
  R has created a ShelveLocGood dummy variable that takes on a value of
1 if the shelving location is good, and 0 otherwise. It has also created a
ShelveLocMedium dummy variable that equals 1 if the shelving location is
medium, and 0 otherwise. A bad shelving location corresponds to a zero
for each of the two dummy variables. The fact that the coeﬃcient for
ShelveLocGood in the regression output is positive indicates that a good
shelving location is associated with high sales (relative to a bad location).
And ShelveLocMedium has a smaller positive coeﬃcient, indicating that a
medium shelving location is associated with higher sales than a bad shelv-
ing location but lower sales than a good shelving location.


3.6.7 Writing Functions
As we have seen, R comes with many useful functions, and still more func-
tions are available by way of R libraries. However, we will often be inter-
ested in performing an operation for which no function is available. In this
setting, we may want to write our own function. For instance, below we
provide a simple function that reads in the ISLR2 and MASS libraries, called
LoadLibraries(). Before we have created the function, R returns an error if
we try to call it.
> LoadLibraries
Error : object ‘ LoadLibraries ’ not found
> LoadLibraries ()
Error : could not find function " LoadLibraries "

We now create the function. Note that the + symbols are printed by R and
should not be typed in. The { symbol informs R that multiple commands
                                                        3.7 Exercises      121

are about to be input. Hitting Enter after typing { will cause R to print the
+ symbol. We can then input as many commands as we wish, hitting Enter
after each one. Finally the } symbol informs R that no further commands
will be entered.
> LoadLibraries <- function () {
+ library ( ISLR2 )
+ library ( MASS )
+ print ( " The libraries have been loaded . " )
+ }

Now if we type in LoadLibraries, R will tell us what is in the function.
> LoadLibraries
function () {
  library ( ISLR2 )
  library ( MASS )
  print (" The libraries have been loaded .")
}

If we call the function, the libraries are loaded in and the print statement
is output.
> LoadLibraries ()
[1] " The libraries have been loaded ."




3.7 Exercises
Conceptual
  1. Describe the null hypotheses to which the p-values given in Table 3.4
     correspond. Explain what conclusions you can draw based on these
     p-values. Your explanation should be phrased in terms of sales, TV,
     radio, and newspaper, rather than in terms of the coeﬃcients of the
     linear model.
  2. Carefully explain the diﬀerences between the KNN classifier and KNN
     regression methods.
  3. Suppose we have a data set with five predictors, X1 = GPA, X2 =
     IQ, X3 = Level (1 for College and 0 for High School), X4 = Interac-
     tion between GPA and IQ, and X5 = Interaction between GPA and
     Level. The response is starting salary after graduation (in thousands
     of dollars). Suppose we use least squares to fit the model, and get
     β̂0 = 50, β̂1 = 20, β̂2 = 0.07, β̂3 = 35, β̂4 = 0.01, β̂5 = −10.
      (a) Which answer is correct, and why?
             i. For a fixed value of IQ and GPA, high school graduates earn
                more, on average, than college graduates.
122     3. Linear Regression

            ii. For a fixed value of IQ and GPA, college graduates earn
                more, on average, than high school graduates.
           iii. For a fixed value of IQ and GPA, high school graduates earn
                more, on average, than college graduates provided that the
                GPA is high enough.
           iv. For a fixed value of IQ and GPA, college graduates earn
                more, on average, than high school graduates provided that
                the GPA is high enough.
      (b) Predict the salary of a college graduate with IQ of 110 and a
          GPA of 4.0.
      (c) True or false: Since the coeﬃcient for the GPA/IQ interaction
          term is very small, there is very little evidence of an interaction
          eﬀect. Justify your answer.

  4. I collect a set of data (n = 100 observations) containing a single
     predictor and a quantitative response. I then fit a linear regression
     model to the data, as well as a separate cubic regression, i.e. Y =
     β0 + β1 X + β2 X 2 + β3 X 3 + ϵ.

      (a) Suppose that the true relationship between X and Y is linear,
          i.e. Y = β0 + β1 X + ϵ. Consider the training residual sum of
          squares (RSS) for the linear regression, and also the training
          RSS for the cubic regression. Would we expect one to be lower
          than the other, would we expect them to be the same, or is there
          not enough information to tell? Justify your answer.
      (b) Answer (a) using test rather than training RSS.
      (c) Suppose that the true relationship between X and Y is not linear,
          but we don’t know how far it is from linear. Consider the training
          RSS for the linear regression, and also the training RSS for the
          cubic regression. Would we expect one to be lower than the
          other, would we expect them to be the same, or is there not
          enough information to tell? Justify your answer.
      (d) Answer (c) using test rather than training RSS.

  5. Consider the fitted values that result from performing linear regres-
     sion without an intercept. In this setting, the ith fitted value takes
     the form
                                   ŷi = xi β̂,

      where                     > n          ? > n     ?
                                 0              0
                                                     2
                         β̂ =          x i yi /    x i′ .             (3.38)
                                 i=1            i′ =1
                                                              3.7 Exercises   123

    Show that we can write
                                        n
                                        0
                                ŷi =           a i′ y i′ .
                                        i′ =1

    What is ai′ ?

    Note: We interpret this result by saying that the fitted values from
    linear regression are linear combinations of the response values.

  6. Using (3.4), argue that in the case of simple linear regression, the
     least squares line always passes through the point (x̄, ȳ).

  7. It is claimed in the text that in the case of simple linear regression
     of Y onto X, the R2 statistic (3.17) is equal to the square of the
     correlation between X and Y (3.18). Prove that this is the case. For
     simplicity, you may assume that x̄ = ȳ = 0.


Applied
  8. This question involves the use of simple linear regression on the Auto
     data set.

     (a) Use the lm() function to perform a simple linear regression with
         mpg as the response and horsepower as the predictor. Use the
         summary() function to print the results. Comment on the output.
         For example:
            i. Is there a relationship between the predictor and the re-
               sponse?
           ii. How strong is the relationship between the predictor and
               the response?
          iii. Is the relationship between the predictor and the response
               positive or negative?
          iv. What is the predicted mpg associated with a horsepower of
               98? What are the associated 95 % confidence and prediction
               intervals?
     (b) Plot the response and the predictor. Use the abline() function
         to display the least squares regression line.
      (c) Use the plot() function to produce diagnostic plots of the least
          squares regression fit. Comment on any problems you see with
          the fit.

  9. This question involves the use of multiple linear regression on the
     Auto data set.
124    3. Linear Regression

      (a) Produce a scatterplot matrix which includes all of the variables
          in the data set.
      (b) Compute the matrix of correlations between the variables using
          the function cor(). You will need to exclude the name variable,
                                                                          cor()
          which is qualitative.
      (c) Use the lm() function to perform a multiple linear regression
          with mpg as the response and all other variables except name as
          the predictors. Use the summary() function to print the results.
          Comment on the output. For instance:
            i. Is there a relationship between the predictors and the re-
               sponse?
           ii. Which predictors appear to have a statistically significant
               relationship to the response?
          iii. What does the coeﬃcient for the year variable suggest?
      (d) Use the plot() function to produce diagnostic plots of the linear
          regression fit. Comment on any problems you see with the fit.
          Do the residual plots suggest any unusually large outliers? Does
          the leverage plot identify any observations with unusually high
          leverage?
      (e) Use the * and : symbols to fit linear regression models with
          interaction eﬀects. Do any interactions appear to be statistically
          significant?
      (f) Try a few
                 √ diﬀerent transformations of the variables, such as
          log(X), X, X 2 . Comment on your findings.

 10. This question should be answered using the Carseats data set.

      (a) Fit a multiple regression model to predict Sales using Price,
          Urban, and US.
      (b) Provide an interpretation of each coeﬃcient in the model. Be
          careful—some of the variables in the model are qualitative!
      (c) Write out the model in equation form, being careful to handle
          the qualitative variables properly.
      (d) For which of the predictors can you reject the null hypothesis
          H0 : βj = 0?
      (e) On the basis of your response to the previous question, fit a
          smaller model that only uses the predictors for which there is
          evidence of association with the outcome.
      (f) How well do the models in (a) and (e) fit the data?
      (g) Using the model from (e), obtain 95 % confidence intervals for
          the coeﬃcient(s).
                                                         3.7 Exercises     125

     (h) Is there evidence of outliers or high leverage observations in the
         model from (e)?

11. In this problem we will investigate the t-statistic for the null hypoth-
    esis H0 : β = 0 in simple linear regression without an intercept. To
    begin, we generate a predictor x and a response y as follows.
    > set.seed (1)
    > x <- rnorm (100)
    > y <- 2 * x + rnorm (100)


     (a) Perform a simple linear regression of y onto x, without an in-
         tercept. Report the coeﬃcient estimate β̂, the standard error of
         this coeﬃcient estimate, and the t-statistic and p-value associ-
         ated with the null hypothesis H0 : β = 0. Comment on these
         results. (You can perform regression without an intercept using
         the command lm(y∼x+0).)
     (b) Now perform a simple linear regression of x onto y without an
         intercept, and report the coeﬃcient estimate, its standard error,
         and the corresponding t-statistic and p-values associated with
         the null hypothesis H0 : β = 0. Comment on these results.
     (c) What is the relationship between the results obtained in (a) and
         (b)?
     (d) For the regression of Y onto X without an intercept, the t-
         statistic for H0 : β = 0 takes the form β̂/SE(β̂), where β̂ is
         given by (3.38), and where
                                    @)
                                       n                2
                                             i − xi β̂)
                                       i=1 (y)
                           SE(β̂) =             n         .
                                     (n − 1) i′ =1 x2i′

         (These formulas are slightly diﬀerent from those given in Sec-
         tions 3.1.1 and 3.1.2, since here we are performing regression
         without an intercept.) Show algebraically, and confirm numeri-
         cally in R, that the t-statistic can be written as
                                  √        )n
                                 ( n − 1) i=1 xi yi
                      5 )n          ) n              )n                .
                        ( i=1 x2i )( i′ =1 yi2′ ) − ( i′ =1 xi′ yi′ )2

     (e) Using the results from (d), argue that the t-statistic for the re-
         gression of y onto x is the same as the t-statistic for the regression
         of x onto y.
     (f) In R, show that when regression is performed with an intercept,
         the t-statistic for H0 : β1 = 0 is the same for the regression of y
         onto x as it is for the regression of x onto y.
126    3. Linear Regression

 12. This problem involves simple linear regression without an intercept.

      (a) Recall that the coeﬃcient estimate β̂ for the linear regression of
          Y onto X without an intercept is given by (3.38). Under what
          circumstance is the coeﬃcient estimate for the regression of X
          onto Y the same as the coeﬃcient estimate for the regression of
          Y onto X?
      (b) Generate an example in R with n = 100 observations in which
          the coeﬃcient estimate for the regression of X onto Y is diﬀerent
          from the coeﬃcient estimate for the regression of Y onto X.
      (c) Generate an example in R with n = 100 observations in which
          the coeﬃcient estimate for the regression of X onto Y is the
          same as the coeﬃcient estimate for the regression of Y onto X.

 13. In this exercise you will create some simulated data and will fit simple
     linear regression models to it. Make sure to use set.seed(1) prior to
     starting part (a) to ensure consistent results.

      (a) Using the rnorm() function, create a vector, x, containing 100
          observations drawn from a N (0, 1) distribution. This represents
          a feature, X.
      (b) Using the rnorm() function, create a vector, eps, containing 100
          observations drawn from a N (0, 0.25) distribution—a normal
          distribution with mean zero and variance 0.25.
      (c) Using x and eps, generate a vector y according to the model

                                 Y = −1 + 0.5X + ϵ.                   (3.39)

          What is the length of the vector y? What are the values of β0
          and β1 in this linear model?
      (d) Create a scatterplot displaying the relationship between x and
          y. Comment on what you observe.
      (e) Fit a least squares linear model to predict y using x. Comment
          on the model obtained. How do β̂0 and β̂1 compare to β0 and
          β1 ?
      (f) Display the least squares line on the scatterplot obtained in (d).
          Draw the population regression line on the plot, in a diﬀerent
          color. Use the legend() command to create an appropriate leg-
          end.
      (g) Now fit a polynomial regression model that predicts y using x
          and x2 . Is there evidence that the quadratic term improves the
          model fit? Explain your answer.
                                                      3.7 Exercises    127

    (h) Repeat (a)–(f) after modifying the data generation process in
        such a way that there is less noise in the data. The model (3.39)
        should remain the same. You can do this by decreasing the vari-
        ance of the normal distribution used to generate the error term
        ϵ in (b). Describe your results.
     (i) Repeat (a)–(f) after modifying the data generation process in
         such a way that there is more noise in the data. The model
         (3.39) should remain the same. You can do this by increasing
         the variance of the normal distribution used to generate the
         error term ϵ in (b). Describe your results.
     (j) What are the confidence intervals for β0 and β1 based on the
         original data set, the noisier data set, and the less noisy data
         set? Comment on your results.

14. This problem focuses on the collinearity problem.

    (a) Perform the following commands in R:
         >   set.seed (1)
         >   x1 <- runif (100)
         >   x2 <- 0.5 * x1 + rnorm (100) / 10
         >   y <- 2 + 2 * x1 + 0.3 * x2 + rnorm (100)

         The last line corresponds to creating a linear model in which y is
         a function of x1 and x2. Write out the form of the linear model.
         What are the regression coeﬃcients?
    (b) What is the correlation between x1 and x2? Create a scatterplot
        displaying the relationship between the variables.
     (c) Using this data, fit a least squares regression to predict y using
         x1 and x2. Describe the results obtained. What are β̂0 , β̂1 , and
         β̂2 ? How do these relate to the true β0 , β1 , and β2 ? Can you
         reject the null hypothesis H0 : β1 = 0? How about the null
         hypothesis H0 : β2 = 0?
    (d) Now fit a least squares regression to predict y using only x1.
        Comment on your results. Can you reject the null hypothesis
        H0 : β1 = 0?
     (e) Now fit a least squares regression to predict y using only x2.
         Comment on your results. Can you reject the null hypothesis
         H0 : β1 = 0?
     (f) Do the results obtained in (c)–(e) contradict each other? Explain
         your answer.
    (g) Now suppose we obtain one additional observation, which was
        unfortunately mismeasured.
128    3. Linear Regression

          > x1 <- c ( x1 , 0.1)
          > x2 <- c ( x2 , 0.8)
          > y <- c (y , 6)

          Re-fit the linear models from (c) to (e) using this new data. What
          eﬀect does this new observation have on the each of the models?
          In each model, is this observation an outlier? A high-leverage
          point? Both? Explain your answers.

 15. This problem involves the Boston data set, which we saw in the lab
     for this chapter. We will now try to predict per capita crime rate
     using the other variables in this data set. In other words, per capita
     crime rate is the response, and the other variables are the predictors.
      (a) For each predictor, fit a simple linear regression model to predict
          the response. Describe your results. In which of the models is
          there a statistically significant association between the predictor
          and the response? Create some plots to back up your assertions.
      (b) Fit a multiple regression model to predict the response using
          all of the predictors. Describe your results. For which predictors
          can we reject the null hypothesis H0 : βj = 0?
      (c) How do your results from (a) compare to your results from (b)?
          Create a plot displaying the univariate regression coeﬃcients
          from (a) on the x-axis, and the multiple regression coeﬃcients
          from (b) on the y-axis. That is, each predictor is displayed as a
          single point in the plot. Its coeﬃcient in a simple linear regres-
          sion model is shown on the x-axis, and its coeﬃcient estimate
          in the multiple linear regression model is shown on the y-axis.
      (d) Is there evidence of non-linear association between any of the
          predictors and the response? To answer this question, for each
          predictor X, fit a model of the form

                         Y = β0 + β1 X + β2 X 2 + β3 X 3 + ϵ.
4
Classification




The linear regression model discussed in Chapter 3 assumes that the re-
sponse variable Y is quantitative. But in many situations, the response
variable is instead qualitative. For example, eye color is qualitative. Of-
                                                                               qualitative
ten qualitative variables are referred to as categorical ; we will use these
terms interchangeably. In this chapter, we study approaches for predicting
qualitative responses, a process that is known as classification. Predicting
                                                                               classification
a qualitative response for an observation can be referred to as classifying
that observation, since it involves assigning the observation to a category,
or class. On the other hand, often the methods used for classification first
predict the probability that the observation belongs to each of the cate-
gories of a qualitative variable, as the basis for making the classification.
In this sense they also behave like regression methods.
   There are many possible classification techniques, or classifiers, that one
                                                                               classifier
might use to predict a qualitative response. We touched on some of these
in Sections 2.1.5 and 2.2.3. In this chapter we discuss some widely-used
classifiers: logistic regression, linear discriminant analysis, quadratic dis-
                                                                               logistic
criminant analysis, naive Bayes, and K-nearest neighbors. The discussion regression
of logistic regression is used as a jumping-oﬀ point for a discussion of gen- linear
eralized linear models, and in particular, Poisson regression. We discuss discriminant
more computer-intensive classification methods in later chapters: these in- analysis
clude generalized additive models (Chapter 7); trees, random forests, and quadratic
boosting (Chapter 8); and support vector machines (Chapter 9).                 discriminant
                                                                                              analysis
                                                                                              naive Bayes
                                                                                              K-nearest
                                                                                              neighbors
                                                                                              generalized
                                                                                              linear
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2021                      129 models
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics,       Poisson
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-1418-1_4                                                   regression
130      4. Classification

4.1 An Overview of Classification
Classification problems occur often, perhaps even more so than regression
problems. Some examples include:

   1. A person arrives at the emergency room with a set of symptoms
      that could possibly be attributed to one of three medical conditions.
      Which of the three conditions does the individual have?

   2. An online banking service must be able to determine whether or not
      a transaction being performed on the site is fraudulent, on the basis
      of the user’s IP address, past transaction history, and so forth.

   3. On the basis of DNA sequence data for a number of patients with
      and without a given disease, a biologist would like to figure out which
      DNA mutations are deleterious (disease-causing) and which are not.

   Just as in the regression setting, in the classification setting we have a
set of training observations (x1 , y1 ), . . . , (xn , yn ) that we can use to build
a classifier. We want our classifier to perform well not only on the training
data, but also on test observations that were not used to train the classifier.
   In this chapter, we will illustrate the concept of classification using the
simulated Default data set. We are interested in predicting whether an
individual will default on his or her credit card payment, on the basis of
annual income and monthly credit card balance. The data set is displayed
in Figure 4.1. In the left-hand panel of Figure 4.1, we have plotted annual
income and monthly credit card balance for a subset of 10, 000 individuals.
The individuals who defaulted in a given month are shown in orange, and
those who did not in blue. (The overall default rate is about 3 %, so we
have plotted only a fraction of the individuals who did not default.) It
appears that individuals who defaulted tended to have higher credit card
balances than those who did not. In the center and right-hand panels of
Figure 4.1, two pairs of boxplots are shown. The first shows the distribution
of balance split by the binary default variable; the second is a similar plot
for income. In this chapter, we learn how to build a model to predict default
(Y ) for any given value of balance (X1 ) and income (X2 ). Since Y is not
quantitative, the simple linear regression model of Chapter 3 is not a good
choice: we will elaborate on this further in Section 4.2.
   It is worth noting that Figure 4.1 displays a very pronounced relation-
ship between the predictor balance and the response default. In most real
applications, the relationship between the predictor and the response will
not be nearly so strong. However, for the sake of illustrating the classifica-
tion procedures discussed in this chapter, we use an example in which the
relationship between the predictor and the response is somewhat exagger-
ated.
