238                                    6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization


                            400                              Income                                400
                                                             Limit




Standardized Coefficients                                              Standardized Coefficients
                            300                              Rating                                300
                                                             Student
                            200                                                                    200

                            100                                                                    100

                            0                                                                      0


                            −100                                                                   −100




                            −300                                                                   −300
                               1e−02      1e+00    1e+02   1e+04                                          0.0   0.2     0.4     0.6     0.8   1.0

                                                  λ                                                                   ∥β̂λR ∥2 /∥β̂∥2


FIGURE 6.4. The standardized ridge regression coeﬃcients are displayed for
the Credit data set, as a function of λ and ∥β̂λR ∥2 /∥β̂∥2 .

each variable with the response; however, we do not want to shrink the
intercept, which is simply a measure of the mean value of the response
when xi1 = xi2 = . . . = xip = 0. If we assume that the variables—that is,
the columns of the data matrix X—have been centered to have mean zero
before ridge regression
                    )n is performed, then the estimated intercept will take
the form β̂0 = ȳ = i=1 yi /n.

An Application to the Credit Data
In Figure 6.4, the ridge regression coeﬃcient estimates for the Credit data
set are displayed. In the left-hand panel, each curve corresponds to the
ridge regression coeﬃcient estimate for one of the ten variables, plotted
as a function of λ. For example, the black solid line represents the ridge
regression estimate for the income coeﬃcient, as λ is varied. At the extreme
left-hand side of the plot, λ is essentially zero, and so the corresponding
ridge coeﬃcient estimates are the same as the usual least squares esti-
mates. But as λ increases, the ridge coeﬃcient estimates shrink towards
zero. When λ is extremely large, then all of the ridge coeﬃcient estimates
are basically zero; this corresponds to the null model that contains no pre-
dictors. In this plot, the income, limit, rating, and student variables are
displayed in distinct colors, since these variables tend to have by far the
largest coeﬃcient estimates. While the ridge coeﬃcient estimates tend to
decrease in aggregate as λ increases, individual coeﬃcients, such as rating
and income, may occasionally increase as λ increases.
   The right-hand panel of Figure 6.4 displays the same ridge coeﬃcient
estimates as the left-hand panel, but instead of displaying λ on the x-axis,
we now display ∥β̂λR ∥2 /∥β̂∥2 , where β̂ denotes the vector of least squares
coeﬃcient estimates. The notation ∥β∥2 denotes the G)ℓ2 norm (pronounced ℓ2 norm
                                                        p     2
“ell 2”) of a vector, and is defined as ∥β∥2 =          j=1 βj . It measures
                                                 6.2 Shrinkage Methods      239

the distance of β from zero. As λ increases, the ℓ2 norm of β̂λR will always
decrease, and so will ∥β̂λR ∥2 /∥β̂∥2 . The latter quantity ranges from 1 (when
λ = 0, in which case the ridge regression coeﬃcient estimate is the same
as the least squares estimate, and so their ℓ2 norms are the same) to 0
(when λ = ∞, in which case the ridge regression coeﬃcient estimate is a
vector of zeros, with ℓ2 norm equal to zero). Therefore, we can think of the
x-axis in the right-hand panel of Figure 6.4 as the amount that the ridge
regression coeﬃcient estimates have been shrunken towards zero; a small
value indicates that they have been shrunken very close to zero.
   The standard least squares coeﬃcient estimates discussed in Chapter 3
are scale equivariant: multiplying Xj by a constant c simply leads to a
                                                                                scale
scaling of the least squares coeﬃcient estimates by a factor of 1/c. In other equivariant
words, regardless of how the jth predictor is scaled, Xj β̂j will remain the
same. In contrast, the ridge regression coeﬃcient estimates can change sub-
stantially when multiplying a given predictor by a constant. For instance,
consider the income variable, which is measured in dollars. One could rea-
sonably have measured income in thousands of dollars, which would result
in a reduction in the observed values of income by a factor of 1,000. Now due
to the sum of squared coeﬃcients term in the ridge regression formulation
(6.5), such a change in scale will not simply cause the ridge regression co-
eﬃcient estimate for income to change by a factor of 1,000. In other words,
     R
Xj β̂j,λ will depend not only on the value of λ, but also on the scaling of the
                                             R
jth predictor. In fact, the value of Xj β̂j,λ   may even depend on the scaling
of the other predictors! Therefore, it is best to apply ridge regression after
standardizing the predictors, using the formula
                                         xij
                        x̃ij = G )                          ,             (6.6)
                                1  n                    2
                                  n   i=1 (xij − xj )


so that they are all on the same scale. In (6.6), the denominator is the
estimated standard deviation of the jth predictor. Consequently, all of the
standardized predictors will have a standard deviation of one. As a re-
sult the final fit will not depend on the scale on which the predictors are
measured. In Figure 6.4, the y-axis displays the standardized ridge regres-
sion coeﬃcient estimates—that is, the coeﬃcient estimates that result from
performing ridge regression using standardized predictors.

Why Does Ridge Regression Improve Over Least Squares?
Ridge regression’s advantage over least squares is rooted in the bias-variance
trade-oﬀ. As λ increases, the flexibility of the ridge regression fit decreases,
leading to decreased variance but increased bias. This is illustrated in the
left-hand panel of Figure 6.5, using a simulated data set containing p = 45
predictors and n = 50 observations. The green curve in the left-hand panel
of Figure 6.5 displays the variance of the ridge regression predictions as a
240                       6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

                     60                                                      60




Mean Squared Error                                      Mean Squared Error
                     50                                                      50

                     40                                                      40

                     30                                                      30

                     20                                                      20

                     10                                                      10

                     0                                                       0

                          1e−01    1e+01    1e+03                                 0.0   0.2     0.4      0.6    0.8   1.0

                                      λ                                                       ∥β̂λR ∥2 /∥β̂∥2

FIGURE 6.5. Squared bias (black), variance (green), and test mean squared
error (purple) for the ridge regression predictions on a simulated data set, as a
function of λ and ∥β̂λR ∥2 /∥β̂∥2 . The horizontal dashed lines indicate the minimum
possible MSE. The purple crosses indicate the ridge regression models for which
the MSE is smallest.

function of λ. At the least squares coeﬃcient estimates, which correspond
to ridge regression with λ = 0, the variance is high but there is no bias. But
as λ increases, the shrinkage of the ridge coeﬃcient estimates leads to a
substantial reduction in the variance of the predictions, at the expense of a
slight increase in bias. Recall that the test mean squared error (MSE), plot-
ted in purple, is closely related to the variance plus the squared bias. For
values of λ up to about 10, the variance decreases rapidly, with very little
increase in bias, plotted in black. Consequently, the MSE drops consider-
ably as λ increases from 0 to 10. Beyond this point, the decrease in variance
due to increasing λ slows, and the shrinkage on the coeﬃcients causes them
to be significantly underestimated, resulting in a large increase in the bias.
The minimum MSE is achieved at approximately λ = 30. Interestingly,
because of its high variance, the MSE associated with the least squares
fit, when λ = 0, is almost as high as that of the null model for which all
coeﬃcient estimates are zero, when λ = ∞. However, for an intermediate
value of λ, the MSE is considerably lower.
   The right-hand panel of Figure 6.5 displays the same curves as the left-
hand panel, this time plotted against the ℓ2 norm of the ridge regression
coeﬃcient estimates divided by the ℓ2 norm of the least squares estimates.
Now as we move from left to right, the fits become more flexible, and so
the bias decreases and the variance increases.
   In general, in situations where the relationship between the response
and the predictors is close to linear, the least squares estimates will have
low bias but may have high variance. This means that a small change in
the training data can cause a large change in the least squares coeﬃcient
estimates. In particular, when the number of variables p is almost as large
as the number of observations n, as in the example in Figure 6.5, the
least squares estimates will be extremely variable. And if p > n, then the
                                                       6.2 Shrinkage Methods         241

least squares estimates do not even have a unique solution, whereas ridge
regression can still perform well by trading oﬀ a small increase in bias for a
large decrease in variance. Hence, ridge regression works best in situations
where the least squares estimates have high variance.
   Ridge regression also has substantial computational advantages over best
subset selection, which requires searching through 2p models. As we dis-
cussed previously, even for moderate values of p, such a search can be
computationally infeasible. In contrast, for any fixed value of λ, ridge re-
gression only fits a single model, and the model-fitting procedure can be
performed quite quickly. In fact, one can show that the computations re-
quired to solve (6.5), simultaneously for all values of λ, are almost identical
to those for fitting a model using least squares.


6.2.2 The Lasso
Ridge regression does have one obvious disadvantage. Unlike best subset,
forward stepwise, and backward stepwise selection, which will generally
select models that involve just a subset of the variables, ridge  ) regression
will include all p predictors in the final model. The penalty λ βj2 in (6.5)
will shrink all of the coeﬃcients towards zero, but it will not set any of them
exactly to zero (unless λ = ∞). This may not be a problem for prediction
accuracy, but it can create a challenge in model interpretation in settings in
which the number of variables p is quite large. For example, in the Credit
data set, it appears that the most important variables are income, limit,
rating, and student. So we might wish to build a model including just
these predictors. However, ridge regression will always generate a model
involving all ten predictors. Increasing the value of λ will tend to reduce
the magnitudes of the coeﬃcients, but will not result in exclusion of any of
the variables.
   The lasso is a relatively recent alternative to ridge regression that over-
                                                                                lasso
comes this disadvantage. The lasso coeﬃcients, β̂λL , minimize the quantity
           ⎛                       ⎞2
     n
     0                  p
                        0                    p
                                             0                       p
                                                                     0
           ⎝yi − β0 −         βj xij ⎠ + λ         |βj | = RSS + λ         |βj |.   (6.7)
     i=1                j=1                  j=1                     j=1


Comparing (6.7) to (6.5), we see that the lasso and ridge regression have
similar formulations. The only diﬀerence is that the βj2 term in the ridge
regression penalty (6.5) has been replaced by |βj | in the lasso penalty (6.7).
In statistical parlance, the lasso uses an ℓ1 (pronounced “ell 1”) penalty
instead )of an ℓ2 penalty. The ℓ1 norm of a coeﬃcient vector β is given by
∥β∥1 =      |βj |.
   As with ridge regression, the lasso shrinks the coeﬃcient estimates to-
wards zero. However, in the case of the lasso, the ℓ1 penalty has the eﬀect
of forcing some of the coeﬃcient estimates to be exactly equal to zero when
 242                                    6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

 the tuning parameter λ is suﬃciently large. Hence, much like best subset se-
 lection, the lasso performs variable selection. As a result, models generated
 from the lasso are generally much easier to interpret than those produced
 by ridge regression. We say that the lasso yields sparse models—that is, sparse
 models that involve only a subset of the variables. As in ridge regression,
 selecting a good value of λ for the lasso is critical; we defer this discussion
 to Section 6.2.3, where we use cross-validation.
    As an example, consider the coeﬃcient plots in Figure 6.6, which are gen-
 erated from applying the lasso to the Credit data set. When λ = 0, then
 the lasso simply gives the least squares fit, and when λ becomes suﬃciently
 large, the lasso gives the null model in which all coeﬃcient estimates equal
 zero. However, in between these two extremes, the ridge regression and
 lasso models are quite diﬀerent from each other. Moving from left to right
 in the right-hand panel of Figure 6.6, we observe that at first the lasso re-
 sults in a model that contains only the rating predictor. Then student and
 limit enter the model almost simultaneously, shortly followed by income.
 Eventually, the remaining variables enter the model. Hence, depending on
 the value of λ, the lasso can produce a model involving any number of vari-
 ables. In contrast, ridge regression will always include all of the variables in
 the model, although the magnitude of the coeﬃcient estimates will depend
 on λ.



                            400                                                                            400




Standardized Coefficients                                                      Standardized Coefficients
                            300                                                                            300

                            200                                                                            200

                            100                                                                            100

                            0                                                                              0


                                                                                                           −100
                                                                                                                        Income
                                                                                                                        Limit
                            −200                                                                                        Rating
                                                                                                                        Student
                                                                                                           −300
                                   20     50   100   200   500   2000   5000                                      0.0   0.2       0.4    0.6    0.8   1.0

                                                           λ                                                                  ∥β̂λL ∥1 /∥β̂∥1


 FIGURE 6.6. The standardized lasso coeﬃcients on the Credit data set are
 shown as a function of λ and ∥β̂λL ∥1 /∥β̂∥1 .
                                                  6.2 Shrinkage Methods        243

Another Formulation for Ridge Regression and the Lasso
One can show that the lasso and ridge regression coeﬃcient estimates solve
the problems
            ⎧     ⎛                      ⎞2 ⎫
            ⎪
            ⎨0 n              0p            ⎪
                                            ⎬              0p
   minimize       ⎝yi − β 0 −     βj xij ⎠     subject to      |βj | ≤ s
       β    ⎪
            ⎩ i=1                           ⎪
                                            ⎭
                              j=1                          j=1

                                                                              (6.8)
and
            ⎧     ⎛                       ⎞2 ⎫
            ⎪
            ⎨0 n               0p            ⎪
                                             ⎬                    p
                                                                  0
   minimize       ⎝y i − β 0 −     βj xij ⎠        subject to           βj2 ≤ s,
      β     ⎪
            ⎩ i=1                            ⎪
                                             ⎭
                               j=1                                j=1

                                                                            (6.9)
respectively. In other words, for every value of λ, there is some s such that
the Equations (6.7) and (6.8) will give the same lasso coeﬃcient estimates.
Similarly, for every value of λ there is a corresponding s such that Equa-
tions (6.5) and (6.9) will give the same ridge regression coeﬃcient estimates.
When p = 2, then (6.8) indicates that the lasso coeﬃcient estimates have
the smallest RSS out of all points that lie within the diamond defined by
|β1 | + |β2 | ≤ s. Similarly, the ridge regression estimates have the smallest
RSS out of all points that lie within the circle defined by β12 + β22 ≤ s.
   We can think of (6.8) as follows. When we perform the lasso we are trying
to find the set of coeﬃcient estimates that lead to the smallest
                                                             )p RSS, subject
to the constraint that there is a budget s for how large j=1 |βj | can be.
When s is extremely large, then this budget is not very restrictive, and so
the coeﬃcient estimates can be large. In fact, if s is large enough that the
least squares solution falls within the budget, then (6.8))will simply yield
                                                                p
the least squares solution. In contrast, if s is small, then j=1 |βj | must be
small in order to avoid violating the budget. Similarly, (6.9) indicates that
when we perform ridge regression, we seek a set of coeﬃcient estimates
such
)p that      the RSS is as small as possible, subject to the requirement that
         2
   j=1 βj not exceed the budget s.
   The formulations (6.8) and (6.9) reveal a close connection between the
lasso, ridge regression, and best subset selection. Consider the problem
            ⎧     ⎛                       ⎞2 ⎫
            ⎪
            ⎨0 n               0p            ⎪
                                             ⎬              0 p
minimize          ⎝y i − β 0 −     βj xij ⎠     subject to        I(βj ̸= 0) ≤ s.
      β     ⎪
            ⎩ i=1                            ⎪
                                             ⎭
                               j=1                           j=1

                                                                            (6.10)
Here I(βj ̸= 0) is an indicator variable: it takes on a value of 1 if βj ̸= 0, and
equals zero otherwise. Then (6.10) amounts to finding a set of coeﬃcient
estimates such that RSS is as small as possible, subject to the constraint
that no more than s coeﬃcients can be nonzero. The problem (6.10) is
244      6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization




FIGURE 6.7. Contours of the error and constraint functions for the lasso
(left) and ridge regression (right). The solid blue areas are the constraint re-
gions, |β1 | + |β2 | ≤ s and β12 + β22 ≤ s, while the red ellipses are the contours of
the RSS.

equivalent to best subset selection. Unfortunately, solving (6.10) is com-' (
putationally infeasible when p is large, since it requires considering all ps
models containing s predictors. Therefore, we can interpret ridge regression
and the lasso as computationally feasible alternatives to best subset selec-
tion that replace the intractable form of the budget in (6.10) with forms
that are much easier to solve. Of course, the lasso is much more closely
related to best subset selection, since the lasso performs feature selection
for s suﬃciently small in (6.8), while ridge regression does not.

The Variable Selection Property of the Lasso
Why is it that the lasso, unlike ridge regression, results in coeﬃcient esti-
mates that are exactly equal to zero? The formulations (6.8) and (6.9) can
be used to shed light on the issue. Figure 6.7 illustrates the situation. The
least squares solution is marked as β̂, while the blue diamond and circle
represent the lasso and ridge regression constraints in (6.8) and (6.9), re-
spectively. If s is suﬃciently large, then the constraint regions will contain
β̂, and so the ridge regression and lasso estimates will be the same as the
least squares estimates. (Such a large value of s corresponds to λ = 0 in
(6.5) and (6.7).) However, in Figure 6.7 the least squares estimates lie out-
side of the diamond and the circle, and so the least squares estimates are
not the same as the lasso and ridge regression estimates.
   Each of the ellipses centered around β̂ represents a contour: this means contour
that all of the points on a particular ellipse have the same RSS value. As
                                                                                                          6.2 Shrinkage Methods                245

                     60                                                                        60




Mean Squared Error                                                        Mean Squared Error
                     50                                                                        50

                     40                                                                        40

                     30                                                                        30

                     20                                                                        20

                     10                                                                        10

                     0                                                                         0

                          0.02   0.10   0.50       2.00   10.00   50.00                             0.0      0.2        0.4    0.6       0.8    1.0

                                               λ                                                                   R2 on Training Data


FIGURE 6.8. Left: Plots of squared bias (black), variance (green), and test MSE
(purple) for the lasso on a simulated data set. Right: Comparison of squared bias,
variance, and test MSE between lasso (solid) and ridge (dotted). Both are plotted
against their R2 on the training data, as a common form of indexing. The crosses
in both plots indicate the lasso model for which the MSE is smallest.


the ellipses expand away from the least squares coeﬃcient estimates, the
RSS increases. Equations (6.8) and (6.9) indicate that the lasso and ridge
regression coeﬃcient estimates are given by the first point at which an
ellipse contacts the constraint region. Since ridge regression has a circular
constraint with no sharp points, this intersection will not generally occur on
an axis, and so the ridge regression coeﬃcient estimates will be exclusively
non-zero. However, the lasso constraint has corners at each of the axes, and
so the ellipse will often intersect the constraint region at an axis. When this
occurs, one of the coeﬃcients will equal zero. In higher dimensions, many of
the coeﬃcient estimates may equal zero simultaneously. In Figure 6.7, the
intersection occurs at β1 = 0, and so the resulting model will only include
β2 .
   In Figure 6.7, we considered the simple case of p = 2. When p = 3,
then the constraint region for ridge regression becomes a sphere, and the
constraint region for the lasso becomes a polyhedron. When p > 3, the
constraint for ridge regression becomes a hypersphere, and the constraint
for the lasso becomes a polytope. However, the key ideas depicted in Fig-
ure 6.7 still hold. In particular, the lasso leads to feature selection when
p > 2 due to the sharp corners of the polyhedron or polytope.

Comparing the Lasso and Ridge Regression
It is clear that the lasso has a major advantage over ridge regression, in
that it produces simpler and more interpretable models that involve only a
subset of the predictors. However, which method leads to better prediction
accuracy? Figure 6.8 displays the variance, squared bias, and test MSE of
the lasso applied to the same simulated data as in Figure 6.5. Clearly the
lasso leads to qualitatively similar behavior to ridge regression, in that as λ
246                           6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

                     100                                                                        100




Mean Squared Error                                                         Mean Squared Error
                     80                                                                         80


                     60                                                                         60


                     40                                                                         40


                     20                                                                         20


                     0                                                                          0

                           0.02   0.10   0.50       2.00   10.00   50.00                              0.4   0.5     0.6   0.7   0.8     0.9   1.0

                                                λ                                                                 R2 on Training Data


FIGURE 6.9. Left: Plots of squared bias (black), variance (green), and test MSE
(purple) for the lasso. The simulated data is similar to that in Figure 6.8, except
that now only two predictors are related to the response. Right: Comparison of
squared bias, variance, and test MSE between lasso (solid) and ridge (dotted).
Both are plotted against their R2 on the training data, as a common form of
indexing. The crosses in both plots indicate the lasso model for which the MSE is
smallest.



increases, the variance decreases and the bias increases. In the right-hand
panel of Figure 6.8, the dotted lines represent the ridge regression fits.
Here we plot both against their R2 on the training data. This is another
useful way to index models, and can be used to compare models with
diﬀerent types of regularization, as is the case here. In this example, the
lasso and ridge regression result in almost identical biases. However, the
variance of ridge regression is slightly lower than the variance of the lasso.
Consequently, the minimum MSE of ridge regression is slightly smaller than
that of the lasso.
   However, the data in Figure 6.8 were generated in such a way that all 45
predictors were related to the response—that is, none of the true coeﬃcients
β1 , . . . , β45 equaled zero. The lasso implicitly assumes that a number of the
coeﬃcients truly equal zero. Consequently, it is not surprising that ridge
regression outperforms the lasso in terms of prediction error in this setting.
Figure 6.9 illustrates a similar situation, except that now the response is a
function of only 2 out of 45 predictors. Now the lasso tends to outperform
ridge regression in terms of bias, variance, and MSE.
   These two examples illustrate that neither ridge regression nor the lasso
will universally dominate the other. In general, one might expect the lasso
to perform better in a setting where a relatively small number of predictors
have substantial coeﬃcients, and the remaining predictors have coeﬃcients
that are very small or that equal zero. Ridge regression will perform better
when the response is a function of many predictors, all with coeﬃcients of
roughly equal size. However, the number of predictors that is related to the
response is never known a priori for real data sets. A technique such as
                                                          6.2 Shrinkage Methods     247

cross-validation can be used in order to determine which approach is better
on a particular data set.
   As with ridge regression, when the least squares estimates have exces-
sively high variance, the lasso solution can yield a reduction in variance
at the expense of a small increase in bias, and consequently can gener-
ate more accurate predictions. Unlike ridge regression, the lasso performs
variable selection, and hence results in models that are easier to interpret.
   There are very eﬃcient algorithms for fitting both ridge and lasso models;
in both cases the entire coeﬃcient paths can be computed with about the
same amount of work as a single least squares fit. We will explore this
further in the lab at the end of this chapter.

A Simple Special Case for Ridge Regression and the Lasso
In order to obtain a better intuition about the behavior of ridge regression
and the lasso, consider a simple special case with n = p, and X a diag-
onal matrix with 1’s on the diagonal and 0’s in all oﬀ-diagonal elements.
To simplify the problem further, assume also that we are performing regres-
sion without an intercept. With these assumptions, the usual least squares
problem simplifies to finding β1 , . . . , βp that minimize
                                   p
                                   0
                                         (yj − βj )2 .                            (6.11)
                                   j=1

In this case, the least squares solution is given by

                                      β̂j = yj .

And in this setting, ridge regression amounts to finding β1 , . . . , βp such that
                           p
                           0                        p
                                                    0
                                 (yj − βj )2 + λ          βj2                     (6.12)
                           j=1                      j=1

is minimized, and the lasso amounts to finding the coeﬃcients such that
                           p
                           0                       p
                                                   0
                                             2
                                 (yj − βj ) + λ           |βj |                   (6.13)
                           j=1                      j=1

is minimized. One can show that in this setting, the ridge regression esti-
mates take the form
                           β̂jR = yj /(1 + λ),                      (6.14)
and the lasso estimates take the form
                          ⎧
                          ⎪
                          ⎨yj − λ/2              if yj > λ/2;
                      L
                    β̂j = yj + λ/2               if yj < −λ/2;                    (6.15)
                          ⎪
                          ⎩
                            0                    if |yj | ≤ λ/2.
248                            6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization


                       1.5                                                                    1.5
                                     Ridge                                                                  Lasso
                                     Least Squares                                                          Least Squares




Coefficient Estimate                                                   Coefficient Estimate
                       0.5                                                                    0.5



                       −0.5                                                                   −0.5


                       −1.5                                                                   −1.5

                              −1.5     −0.5 0.0      0.5   1.0   1.5                                 −1.5     −0.5 0.0      0.5   1.0   1.5

                                            yj                                                                     yj

FIGURE 6.10. The ridge regression and lasso coeﬃcient estimates for a simple
setting with n = p and X a diagonal matrix with 1’s on the diagonal. Left: The
ridge regression coeﬃcient estimates are shrunken proportionally towards zero,
relative to the least squares estimates. Right: The lasso coeﬃcient estimates are
soft-thresholded towards zero.

   Figure 6.10 displays the situation. We can see that ridge regression and
the lasso perform two very diﬀerent types of shrinkage. In ridge regression,
each least squares coeﬃcient estimate is shrunken by the same proportion.
In contrast, the lasso shrinks each least squares coeﬃcient towards zero by
a constant amount, λ/2; the least squares coeﬃcients that are less than
λ/2 in absolute value are shrunken entirely to zero. The type of shrink-
age performed by the lasso in this simple setting (6.15) is known as soft-
thresholding. The fact that some lasso coeﬃcients are shrunken entirely to
                                                                             soft-
zero explains why the lasso performs feature selection.                      thresholding
   In the case of a more general data matrix X, the story is a little more
complicated than what is depicted in Figure 6.10, but the main ideas still
hold approximately: ridge regression more or less shrinks every dimension
of the data by the same proportion, whereas the lasso more or less shrinks
all coeﬃcients toward zero by a similar amount, and suﬃciently small co-
eﬃcients are shrunken all the way to zero.

Bayesian Interpretation for Ridge Regression and the Lasso


  We now show that one can view ridge regression and the lasso through
a Bayesian lens. A Bayesian viewpoint for regression assumes that the
coeﬃcient vector β has some prior distribution, say p(β), where β =
(β0 , β1 , . . . , βp )T . The likelihood of the data can be written as f (Y |X, β),
where X = (X1 , . . . , Xp ). Multiplying the prior distribution by the likeli-
hood gives us (up to a proportionality constant) the posterior distribution,
                                                                                     posterior
which takes the form                                                                 distribution

                                     p(β|X, Y ) ∝ f (Y |X, β)p(β|X) = f (Y |X, β)p(β),
                                                                 6.2 Shrinkage Methods       249


         0.7                                              0.7

         0.6                                              0.6

         0.5                                              0.5

         0.4                                              0.4
g(βj )                                           g(βj )
         0.3                                              0.3

         0.2                                              0.2

         0.1                                              0.1

         0.0                                              0.0

               −3   −2   −1   0    1   2    3                   −3   −2   −1   0    1    2   3

                              βj                                               βj

FIGURE 6.11. Left: Ridge regression is the posterior mode for β under a Gaus-
sian prior. Right: The lasso is the posterior mode for β under a double-exponential
prior.

where the proportionality above follows from Bayes’ theorem, and the
equality above follows from the assumption that X is fixed.
  We assume the usual linear model,

                               Y = β0 + X1 β1 + · · · + Xp βp + ϵ,

and suppose that the errors are independent andFp drawn from a normal dis-
tribution. Furthermore, assume that p(β) = j=1 g(βj ), for some density
function g. It turns out that ridge regression and the lasso follow naturally
from two special cases of g:
         • If g is a Gaussian distribution with mean zero and standard deviation
           a function of λ, then it follows that the posterior mode for β—that
                                                                                    posterior
           is, the most likely value for β, given the data—is given by the ridge mode
           regression solution. (In fact, the ridge regression solution is also the
           posterior mean.)
         • If g is a double-exponential (Laplace) distribution with mean zero
           and scale parameter a function of λ, then it follows that the posterior
           mode for β is the lasso solution. (However, the lasso solution is not
           the posterior mean, and in fact, the posterior mean does not yield a
           sparse coeﬃcient vector.)
The Gaussian and double-exponential priors are displayed in Figure 6.11.
Therefore, from a Bayesian viewpoint, ridge regression and the lasso follow
directly from assuming the usual linear model with normal errors, together
with a simple prior distribution for β. Notice that the lasso prior is steeply
peaked at zero, while the Gaussian is flatter and fatter at zero. Hence, the
lasso expects a priori that many of the coeﬃcients are (exactly) zero, while
ridge assumes the coeﬃcients are randomly distributed about zero.
250                             6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization




Cross−Validation Error                                              Standardized Coefficients
                         25.6
                                                                                                300



                         25.4
                                                                                                100

                                                                                                0

                         25.2
                                                                                                −100



                         25.0
                                                                                                −300
                                5e−03   5e−02       5e−01   5e+00                                      5e−03   5e−02       5e−01   5e+00

                                                λ                                                                      λ

FIGURE 6.12. Left: Cross-validation errors that result from applying ridge
regression to the Credit data set with various values of λ. Right: The coeﬃcient
estimates as a function of λ. The vertical dashed lines indicate the value of λ
selected by cross-validation.


6.2.3 Selecting the Tuning Parameter
Just as the subset selection approaches considered in Section 6.1 require
a method to determine which of the models under consideration is best,
implementing ridge regression and the lasso requires a method for selecting
a value for the tuning parameter λ in (6.5) and (6.7), or equivalently, the
value of the constraint s in (6.9) and (6.8). Cross-validation provides a sim-
ple way to tackle this problem. We choose a grid of λ values, and compute
the cross-validation error for each value of λ, as described in Chapter 5. We
then select the tuning parameter value for which the cross-validation error
is smallest. Finally, the model is re-fit using all of the available observations
and the selected value of the tuning parameter.
   Figure 6.12 displays the choice of λ that results from performing leave-
one-out cross-validation on the ridge regression fits from the Credit data
set. The dashed vertical lines indicate the selected value of λ. In this case
the value is relatively small, indicating that the optimal fit only involves a
small amount of shrinkage relative to the least squares solution. In addition,
the dip is not very pronounced, so there is rather a wide range of values
that would give a very similar error. In a case like this we might simply use
the least squares solution.
   Figure 6.13 provides an illustration of ten-fold cross-validation applied to
the lasso fits on the sparse simulated data from Figure 6.9. The left-hand
panel of Figure 6.13 displays the cross-validation error, while the right-hand
panel displays the coeﬃcient estimates. The vertical dashed lines indicate
the point at which the cross-validation error is smallest. The two colored
lines in the right-hand panel of Figure 6.13 represent the two predictors
that are related to the response, while the grey lines represent the unre-
lated predictors; these are often referred to as signal and noise variables,
                                                                                  signal
respectively. Not only has the lasso correctly given much larger coeﬃ-
                                                                    6.3 Dimension Reduction Methods                                            251


                         1400                                                                         15




Cross−Validation Error                                                    Standardized Coefficients
                                                                                                      10
                         1000

                                                                                                      5

                         600
                                                                                                      0


                         200                                                                          −5

                         0

                                0.0   0.2     0.4   0.6     0.8   1.0                                      0.0   0.2     0.4   0.6     0.8     1.0

                                            ∥β̂λL∥1/∥β̂∥1                                                              ∥β̂λL∥1/∥β̂∥1

FIGURE 6.13. Left: Ten-fold cross-validation MSE for the lasso, applied to
the sparse simulated data set from Figure 6.9. Right: The corresponding lasso
coeﬃcient estimates are displayed. The two signal variables are shown in color,
and the noise variables are in gray. The vertical dashed lines indicate the lasso
fit for which the cross-validation error is smallest.



cient estimates to the two signal predictors, but also the minimum cross-
validation error corresponds to a set of coeﬃcient estimates for which only
the signal variables are non-zero. Hence cross-validation together with the
lasso has correctly identified the two signal variables in the model, even
though this is a challenging setting, with p = 45 variables and only n = 50
observations. In contrast, the least squares solution—displayed on the far
right of the right-hand panel of Figure 6.13—assigns a large coeﬃcient
estimate to only one of the two signal variables.




6.3 Dimension Reduction Methods
The methods that we have discussed so far in this chapter have controlled
variance in two diﬀerent ways, either by using a subset of the original vari-
ables, or by shrinking their coeﬃcients toward zero. All of these methods
are defined using the original predictors, X1 , X2 , . . . , Xp . We now explore
a class of approaches that transform the predictors and then fit a least
squares model using the transformed variables. We will refer to these tech-
niques as dimension reduction methods.
                                                                                 dimension
  Let Z1 , Z2 , . . . , ZM represent M < p linear combinations of our original reduction
p predictors. That is,                                                           linear
                                                                                                                                                      combination
                                                                        p
                                                                        0
                                                             Zm =                    φjm Xj                                                  (6.16)
                                                                        j=1
252      6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

for some constants φ1m , φ2m . . . , φpm , m = 1, . . . , M . We can then fit the
linear regression model
                                   M
                                   0
                    yi = θ 0 +           θm zim + ϵi ,   i = 1, . . . , n,               (6.17)
                                  m=1

using least squares. Note that in (6.17), the regression coeﬃcients are given
by θ0 , θ1 , . . . , θM . If the constants φ1m , φ2m , . . . , φpm are chosen wisely, then
such dimension reduction approaches can often outperform least squares
regression. In other words, fitting (6.17) using least squares can lead to
better results than fitting (6.1) using least squares.
   The term dimension reduction comes from the fact that this approach
reduces the problem of estimating the p + 1 coeﬃcients β0 , β1 , . . . , βp to the
simpler problem of estimating the M + 1 coeﬃcients θ0 , θ1 , . . . , θM , where
M < p. In other words, the dimension of the problem has been reduced
from p + 1 to M + 1.
   Notice that from (6.16),
      M
      0                M
                       0          p
                                  0                 p 0
                                                    0 M                      p
                                                                             0
            θm zim =         θm         φjm xij =             θm φjm xij =         βj xij ,
      m=1              m=1        j=1               j=1 m=1                  j=1

where
                                            M
                                            0
                                    βj =          θm φjm .                               (6.18)
                                            m=1

Hence (6.17) can be thought of as a special case of the original linear
regression model given by (6.1). Dimension reduction serves to constrain
the estimated βj coeﬃcients, since now they must take the form (6.18).
This constraint on the form of the coeﬃcients has the potential to bias the
coeﬃcient estimates. However, in situations where p is large relative to n,
selecting a value of M ≪ p can significantly reduce the variance of the fitted
coeﬃcients. If M = p, and all the Zm are linearly independent, then (6.18)
poses no constraints. In this case, no dimension reduction occurs, and so
fitting (6.17) is equivalent to performing least squares on the original p
predictors.
   All dimension reduction methods work in two steps. First, the trans-
formed predictors Z1 , Z2 , . . . , ZM are obtained. Second, the model is fit
using these M predictors. However, the choice of Z1 , Z2 , . . . , ZM , or equiv-
alently, the selection of the φjm ’s, can be achieved in diﬀerent ways. In this
chapter, we will consider two approaches for this task: principal components
and partial least squares.


6.3.1 Principal Components Regression
Principal components analysis (PCA) is a popular approach for deriving
                                                                                                  principal
                                                                                                  components
                                                                                                  analysis
                                                6.3 Dimension Reduction Methods     253


                      35

                      30

                      25




        Ad Spending
                      20

                      15

                      10

                      5

                      0

                           10      20      30       40       50    60      70

                                                Population

FIGURE 6.14. The population size (pop) and ad spending (ad) for 100 diﬀerent
cities are shown as purple circles. The green solid line indicates the first principal
component, and the blue dashed line indicates the second principal component.


a low-dimensional set of features from a large set of variables. PCA is
discussed in greater detail as a tool for unsupervised learning in Chapter 12.
Here we describe its use as a dimension reduction technique for regression.



An Overview of Principal Components Analysis
PCA is a technique for reducing the dimension of an n × p data matrix X.
The first principal component direction of the data is that along which the
observations vary the most. For instance, consider Figure 6.14, which shows
population size (pop) in tens of thousands of people, and ad spending for a
particular company (ad) in thousands of dollars, for 100 cities5 . The green
solid line represents the first principal component direction of the data. We
can see by eye that this is the direction along which there is the greatest
variability in the data. That is, if we projected the 100 observations onto
this line (as shown in the left-hand panel of Figure 6.15), then the resulting
projected observations would have the largest possible variance; projecting
the observations onto any other line would yield projected observations
with lower variance. Projecting a point onto a line simply involves finding
the location on the line which is closest to the point.
  The first principal component is displayed graphically in Figure 6.14, but
how can it be summarized mathematically? It is given by the formula

                           Z1 = 0.839 × (pop − pop) + 0.544 × (ad − ad).          (6.19)

  5 This dataset is distinct from the Advertising data discussed in Chapter 3.
254                6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization




                                                  2nd Principal Component
                                                                            10
              30

              25




Ad Spending
                                                                            5

              20
                                                                            0
              15
                                                                            −5
              10

              5                                                             −10


                    20     30      40    50                                       −20       −10       0       10       20

                            Population                                                  1st Principal Component


FIGURE 6.15. A subset of the advertising data. The mean pop and ad budgets
are indicated with a blue circle. Left: The first principal component direction is
shown in green. It is the dimension along which the data vary the most, and it also
defines the line that is closest to all n of the observations. The distances from each
observation to the principal component are represented using the black dashed line
segments. The blue dot represents (pop, ad). Right: The left-hand panel has been
rotated so that the first principal component direction coincides with the x-axis.

Here φ11 = 0.839 and φ21 = 0.544 are the principal component loadings,
which define the direction referred to above. In (6.19), pop indicates the
mean of all pop values in this data set, and ad indicates the mean of all ad-
vertising spending. The idea is that out of every possible linear combination
of pop and ad such that φ211 + φ221 = 1, this particular linear combination
yields the highest variance: i.e. this is the linear combination for which
Var(φ11 × (pop − pop) + φ21 × (ad − ad)) is maximized. It is necessary to
consider only linear combinations of the form φ211 +φ221 = 1, since otherwise
we could increase φ11 and φ21 arbitrarily in order to blow up the variance.
In (6.19), the two loadings are both positive and have similar size, and so
Z1 is almost an average of the two variables.
   Since n = 100, pop and ad are vectors of length 100, and so is Z1 in
(6.19). For instance,

                         zi1 = 0.839 × (popi − pop) + 0.544 × (adi − ad).                                          (6.20)

The values of z11 , . . . , zn1 are known as the principal component scores, and
can be seen in the right-hand panel of Figure 6.15.
   There is also another interpretation for PCA: the first principal compo-
nent vector defines the line that is as close as possible to the data. For
instance, in Figure 6.14, the first principal component line minimizes the
sum of the squared perpendicular distances between each point and the
line. These distances are plotted as dashed line segments in the left-hand
panel of Figure 6.15, in which the crosses represent the projection of each
point onto the first principal component line. The first principal component
has been chosen so that the projected observations are as close as possible
to the original observations.
                                                           6.3 Dimension Reduction Methods                          255


             60
                                                                            30

             50                                                             25




Population                                                    Ad Spending
                                                                            20
             40

                                                                            15
             30
                                                                            10

             20                                                             5



                    −3    −2    −1   0     1       2   3                         −3    −2    −1   0     1       2   3

                         1st Principal Component                                      1st Principal Component


FIGURE 6.16. Plots of the first principal component scores zi1 versus pop and
ad. The relationships are strong.


   In the right-hand panel of Figure 6.15, the left-hand panel has been
rotated so that the first principal component direction coincides with the
x-axis. It is possible to show that the first principal component score for
the ith observation, given in (6.20), is the distance in the x-direction of the
ith cross from zero. So for example, the point in the bottom-left corner of
the left-hand panel of Figure 6.15 has a large negative principal component
score, zi1 = −26.1, while the point in the top-right corner has a large
positive score, zi1 = 18.7. These scores can be computed directly using
(6.20).
   We can think of the values of the principal component Z1 as single-
number summaries of the joint pop and ad budgets for each location. In
this example, if zi1 = 0.839 × (popi − pop) + 0.544 × (adi − ad) < 0,
then this indicates a city with below-average population size and below-
average ad spending. A positive score suggests the opposite. How well can a
single number represent both pop and ad? In this case, Figure 6.14 indicates
that pop and ad have approximately a linear relationship, and so we might
expect that a single-number summary will work well. Figure 6.16 displays
zi1 versus both pop and ad.6 The plots show a strong relationship between
the first principal component and the two features. In other words, the first
principal component appears to capture most of the information contained
in the pop and ad predictors.
   So far we have concentrated on the first principal component. In gen-
eral, one can construct up to p distinct principal components. The second
principal component Z2 is a linear combination of the variables that is un-
correlated with Z1 , and has largest variance subject to this constraint. The
second principal component direction is illustrated as a dashed blue line in

             6 The principal components were calculated after first standardizing both pop and

ad, a common approach. Hence, the x-axes on Figures 6.15 and 6.16 are not on the same
scale.
256                      6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization


             60
                                                                          30

             50                                                           25




Population                                                  Ad Spending
                                                                          20
             40

                                                                          15
             30
                                                                          10

             20                                                           5



                  −1.0      −0.5     0.0    0.5       1.0                      −1.0   −0.5     0.0    0.5       1.0

                            2nd Principal Component                                   2nd Principal Component


FIGURE 6.17. Plots of the second principal component scores zi2 versus pop
and ad. The relationships are weak.

Figure 6.14. It turns out that the zero correlation condition of Z1 with Z2
is equivalent to the condition that the direction must be perpendicular, or perpen-
orthogonal, to the first principal component direction. The second principal dicular
component is given by the formula                                            orthogonal

                               Z2 = 0.544 × (pop − pop) − 0.839 × (ad − ad).
Since the advertising data has two predictors, the first two principal com-
ponents contain all of the information that is in pop and ad. However, by
construction, the first component will contain the most information. Con-
sider, for example, the much larger variability of zi1 (the x-axis) versus
zi2 (the y-axis) in the right-hand panel of Figure 6.15. The fact that the
second principal component scores are much closer to zero indicates that
this component captures far less information. As another illustration, Fig-
ure 6.17 displays zi2 versus pop and ad. There is little relationship between
the second principal component and these two predictors, again suggesting
that in this case, one only needs the first principal component in order to
accurately represent the pop and ad budgets.
   With two-dimensional data, such as in our advertising example, we can
construct at most two principal components. However, if we had other
predictors, such as population age, income level, education, and so forth,
then additional components could be constructed. They would successively
maximize variance, subject to the constraint of being uncorrelated with the
preceding components.

The Principal Components Regression Approach
The principal components regression (PCR) approach involves construct-
                                                                             principal
ing the first M principal components, Z1 , . . . , ZM , and then using these components
components as the predictors in a linear regression model that is fit us- regression
ing least squares. The key idea is that often a small number of principal
components suﬃce to explain most of the variability in the data, as well
                                                          6.3 Dimension Reduction Methods                               257

                     70
                                                                                  150                      Squared Bias
                     60                                                                                    Test MSE




Mean Squared Error                                           Mean Squared Error
                                                                                                           Variance
                     50
                                                                                  100
                     40

                     30

                     20                                                           50

                     10

                     0                                                            0

                          0   10     20     30       40                                 0   10     20     30       40

                              Number of Components                                          Number of Components


FIGURE 6.18. PCR was applied to two simulated data sets. In each panel, the
horizontal dashed line represents the irreducible error. Left: Simulated data from
Figure 6.8. Right: Simulated data from Figure 6.9.



as the relationship with the response. In other words, we assume that the
directions in which X1 , . . . , Xp show the most variation are the directions
that are associated with Y . While this assumption is not guaranteed to be
true, it often turns out to be a reasonable enough approximation to give
good results.
   If the assumption underlying PCR holds, then fitting a least squares
model to Z1 , . . . , ZM will lead to better results than fitting a least squares
model to X1 , . . . , Xp , since most or all of the information in the data that
relates to the response is contained in Z1 , . . . , ZM , and by estimating only
M ≪ p coeﬃcients we can mitigate overfitting. In the advertising data, the
first principal component explains most of the variance in both pop and ad,
so a principal component regression that uses this single variable to predict
some response of interest, such as sales, will likely perform quite well.
   Figure 6.18 displays the PCR fits on the simulated data sets from Fig-
ures 6.8 and 6.9. Recall that both data sets were generated using n = 50
observations and p = 45 predictors. However, while the response in the
first data set was a function of all the predictors, the response in the sec-
ond data set was generated using only two of the predictors. The curves are
plotted as a function of M , the number of principal components used as
predictors in the regression model. As more principal components are used
in the regression model, the bias decreases, but the variance increases. This
results in a typical U-shape for the mean squared error. When M = p = 45,
then PCR amounts simply to a least squares fit using all of the original
predictors. The figure indicates that performing PCR with an appropriate
choice of M can result in a substantial improvement over least squares, es-
pecially in the left-hand panel. However, by examining the ridge regression
and lasso results in Figures 6.5, 6.8, and 6.9, we see that PCR does not
perform as well as the two shrinkage methods in this example.
258                           6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization


                                         PCR                                                   Ridge Regression and Lasso

                     70                                                             70
                                                Squared Bias
                     60                         Test MSE                            60




Mean Squared Error                                             Mean Squared Error
                                                Variance
                     50                                                             50

                     40                                                             40

                     30                                                             30

                     20                                                             20

                     10                                                             10

                     0                                                              0

                          0      10     20     30       40                               0.0     0.2      0.4    0.6      0.8   1.0

                                 Number of Components                                                  Shrinkage Factor


FIGURE 6.19. PCR, ridge regression, and the lasso were applied to a simulated
data set in which the first five principal components of X contain all the informa-
tion about the response Y . In each panel, the irreducible error Var(ϵ) is shown as
a horizontal dashed line. Left: Results for PCR. Right: Results for lasso (solid)
and ridge regression (dotted). The x-axis displays the shrinkage factor of the co-
eﬃcient estimates, defined as the ℓ2 norm of the shrunken coeﬃcient estimates
divided by the ℓ2 norm of the least squares estimate.


   The relatively worse performance of PCR in Figure 6.18 is a consequence
of the fact that the data were generated in such a way that many princi-
pal components are required in order to adequately model the response.
In contrast, PCR will tend to do well in cases when the first few principal
components are suﬃcient to capture most of the variation in the predictors
as well as the relationship with the response. The left-hand panel of Fig-
ure 6.19 illustrates the results from another simulated data set designed to
be more favorable to PCR. Here the response was generated in such a way
that it depends exclusively on the first five principal components. Now the
bias drops to zero rapidly as M , the number of principal components used
in PCR, increases. The mean squared error displays a clear minimum at
M = 5. The right-hand panel of Figure 6.19 displays the results on these
data using ridge regression and the lasso. All three methods oﬀer a signif-
icant improvement over least squares. However, PCR and ridge regression
slightly outperform the lasso.
   We note that even though PCR provides a simple way to perform re-
gression using M < p predictors, it is not a feature selection method. This
is because each of the M principal components used in the regression is a
linear combination of all p of the original features. For instance, in (6.19),
Z1 was a linear combination of both pop and ad. Therefore, while PCR of-
ten performs quite well in many practical settings, it does not result in the
development of a model that relies upon a small set of the original features.
In this sense, PCR is more closely related to ridge regression than to the
lasso. In fact, one can show that PCR and ridge regression are very closely
                                                                    6.3 Dimension Reduction Methods                                   259


                            400        Income
                                       Limit                                                  80000




Standardized Coefficients
                            300        Rating




                                                                       Cross−Validation MSE
                                       Student
                            200
                                                                                              60000
                            100


                                                                                              40000
                            0


                            −100

                                                                                              20000


                            −300
                                   2       4     6      8      10                                     2     4      6      8      10

                                        Number of Components                                              Number of Components


FIGURE 6.20. Left: PCR standardized coeﬃcient estimates on the Credit data
set for diﬀerent values of M . Right: The ten-fold cross-validation MSE obtained
using PCR, as a function of M .

related. One can even think of ridge regression as a continuous version of
PCR!7
   In PCR, the number of principal components, M , is typically chosen by
cross-validation. The results of applying PCR to the Credit data set are
shown in Figure 6.20; the right-hand panel displays the cross-validation er-
rors obtained, as a function of M . On these data, the lowest cross-validation
error occurs when there are M = 10 components; this corresponds to al-
most no dimension reduction at all, since PCR with M = 11 is equivalent
to simply performing least squares.
   When performing PCR, we generally recommend standardizing each pre-
dictor, using (6.6), prior to generating the principal components. This stan-
dardization ensures that all variables are on the same scale. In the absence
of standardization, the high-variance variables will tend to play a larger
role in the principal components obtained, and the scale on which the vari-
ables are measured will ultimately have an eﬀect on the final PCR model.
However, if the variables are all measured in the same units (say, kilograms,
or inches), then one might choose not to standardize them.


6.3.2 Partial Least Squares
The PCR approach that we just described involves identifying linear combi-
nations, or directions, that best represent the predictors X1 , . . . , Xp . These
directions are identified in an unsupervised way, since the response Y is not
used to help determine the principal component directions. That is, the
response does not supervise the identification of the principal components.

  7 More details can be found in Section 3.5 of The Elements of Statistical Learning by

Hastie, Tibshirani, and Friedman.
260         6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization



                      30


                      25




        Ad Spending
                      20


                      15


                      10


                      5



                           20     30         40            50       60

                                        Population

FIGURE 6.21. For the advertising data, the first PLS direction (solid line) and
first PCR direction (dotted line) are shown.



Consequently, PCR suﬀers from a drawback: there is no guarantee that the
directions that best explain the predictors will also be the best directions
to use for predicting the response. Unsupervised methods are discussed
further in Chapter 12.
   We now present partial least squares (PLS), a supervised alternative to
                                                                                   partial least
PCR. Like PCR, PLS is a dimension reduction method, which first identifies squares
a new set of features Z1 , . . . , ZM that are linear combinations of the original
features, and then fits a linear model via least squares using these M new
features. But unlike PCR, PLS identifies these new features in a supervised
way—that is, it makes use of the response Y in order to identify new
features that not only approximate the old features well, but also that are
related to the response. Roughly speaking, the PLS approach attempts to
find directions that help explain both the response and the predictors.
   We now describe how the first PLS direction is computed. After stan-
dardizing the p predictors, PLS computes the first direction Z1 by setting
each φj1 in (6.16) equal to the coeﬃcient from the simple linear regression
of Y onto Xj . One can show that this coeﬃcient is proportional
                                                              )p       to the cor-
relation between Y and Xj . Hence, in computing Z1 = j=1 φj1 Xj , PLS
places the highest weight on the variables that are most strongly related
to the response.
   Figure 6.21 displays an example of PLS on a synthetic dataset with Sales
in each of 100 regions as the response, and two predictors; Population Size
and Advertising Spending. The solid green line indicates the first PLS di-
rection, while the dotted line shows the first principal component direction.
PLS has chosen a direction that has less change in the ad dimension per
unit change in the pop dimension, relative to PCA. This suggests that pop
is more highly correlated with the response than is ad. The PLS direction
                                6.4 Considerations in High Dimensions     261

does not fit the predictors as closely as does PCA, but it does a better job
explaining the response.
   To identify the second PLS direction we first adjust each of the variables
for Z1 , by regressing each variable on Z1 and taking residuals. These resid-
uals can be interpreted as the remaining information that has not been
explained by the first PLS direction. We then compute Z2 using this or-
thogonalized data in exactly the same fashion as Z1 was computed based
on the original data. This iterative approach can be repeated M times to
identify multiple PLS components Z1 , . . . , ZM . Finally, at the end of this
procedure, we use least squares to fit a linear model to predict Y using
Z1 , . . . , ZM in exactly the same fashion as for PCR.
   As with PCR, the number M of partial least squares directions used in
PLS is a tuning parameter that is typically chosen by cross-validation. We
generally standardize the predictors and response before performing PLS.
   PLS is popular in the field of chemometrics, where many variables arise
from digitized spectrometry signals. In practice it often performs no better
than ridge regression or PCR. While the supervised dimension reduction
of PLS can reduce bias, it also has the potential to increase variance, so
that the overall benefit of PLS relative to PCR is a wash.



6.4 Considerations in High Dimensions
6.4.1 High-Dimensional Data
Most traditional statistical techniques for regression and classification are
intended for the low-dimensional setting in which n, the number of ob-
                                                                               low-
servations, is much greater than p, the number of features. This is due in dimensional
part to the fact that throughout most of the field’s history, the bulk of sci-
entific problems requiring the use of statistics have been low-dimensional.
For instance, consider the task of developing a model to predict a patient’s
blood pressure on the basis of his or her age, sex, and body mass index
(BMI). There are three predictors, or four if an intercept is included in
the model, and perhaps several thousand patients for whom blood pressure
and age, sex, and BMI are available. Hence n ≫ p, and so the problem is
low-dimensional. (By dimension here we are referring to the size of p.)
   In the past 20 years, new technologies have changed the way that data
are collected in fields as diverse as finance, marketing, and medicine. It is
now commonplace to collect an almost unlimited number of feature mea-
surements (p very large). While p can be extremely large, the number of
observations n is often limited due to cost, sample availability, or other
considerations. Two examples are as follows:

  1. Rather than predicting blood pressure on the basis of just age, sex,
     and BMI, one might also collect measurements for half a million sin-
262     6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

      gle nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; these are individual DNA mu-
      tations that are relatively common in the population) for inclusion in
      the predictive model. Then n ≈ 200 and p ≈ 500,000.

  2. A marketing analyst interested in understanding people’s online shop-
     ping patterns could treat as features all of the search terms entered
     by users of a search engine. This is sometimes known as the “bag-of-
     words” model. The same researcher might have access to the search
     histories of only a few hundred or a few thousand search engine users
     who have consented to share their information with the researcher.
     For a given user, each of the p search terms is scored present (0) or
     absent (1), creating a large binary feature vector. Then n ≈ 1,000
     and p is much larger.

   Data sets containing more features than observations are often referred
to as high-dimensional. Classical approaches such as least squares linear
                                                                              high-
regression are not appropriate in this setting. Many of the issues that arise dimensional
in the analysis of high-dimensional data were discussed earlier in this book,
since they apply also when n > p: these include the role of the bias-variance
trade-oﬀ and the danger of overfitting. Though these issues are always rele-
vant, they can become particularly important when the number of features
is very large relative to the number of observations.
   We have defined the high-dimensional setting as the case where the num-
ber of features p is larger than the number of observations n. But the con-
siderations that we will now discuss certainly also apply if p is slightly
smaller than n, and are best always kept in mind when performing super-
vised learning.


6.4.2 What Goes Wrong in High Dimensions?
In order to illustrate the need for extra care and specialized techniques
for regression and classification when p > n, we begin by examining what
can go wrong if we apply a statistical technique not intended for the high-
dimensional setting. For this purpose, we examine least squares regression.
But the same concepts apply to logistic regression, linear discriminant anal-
ysis, and other classical statistical approaches.
   When the number of features p is as large as, or larger than, the number
of observations n, least squares as described in Chapter 3 cannot (or rather,
should not) be performed. The reason is simple: regardless of whether or
not there truly is a relationship between the features and the response,
least squares will yield a set of coeﬃcient estimates that result in a perfect
fit to the data, such that the residuals are zero.
   An example is shown in Figure 6.22 with p = 1 feature (plus an intercept)
in two cases: when there are 20 observations, and when there are only
two observations. When there are 20 observations, n > p and the least
                                       6.4 Considerations in High Dimensions              263


    10                                           10



    5                                            5


Y                                            Y
    0                                            0



    −5                                           −5



    −10                                          −10
          −1.5 −1.0 −0.5   0.0   0.5   1.0             −1.5 −1.0 −0.5   0.0   0.5   1.0

                           X                                            X

FIGURE 6.22. Left: Least squares regression in the low-dimensional setting.
Right: Least squares regression with n = 2 observations and two parameters to be
estimated (an intercept and a coeﬃcient).

squares regression line does not perfectly fit the data; instead, the regression
line seeks to approximate the 20 observations as well as possible. On the
other hand, when there are only two observations, then regardless of the
values of those observations, the regression line will fit the data exactly.
This is problematic because this perfect fit will almost certainly lead to
overfitting of the data. In other words, though it is possible to perfectly fit
the training data in the high-dimensional setting, the resulting linear model
will perform extremely poorly on an independent test set, and therefore
does not constitute a useful model. In fact, we can see that this happened
in Figure 6.22: the least squares line obtained in the right-hand panel will
perform very poorly on a test set comprised of the observations in the left-
hand panel. The problem is simple: when p > n or p ≈ n, a simple least
squares regression line is too flexible and hence overfits the data.
   Figure 6.23 further illustrates the risk of carelessly applying least squares
when the number of features p is large. Data were simulated with n = 20
observations, and regression was performed with between 1 and 20 features,
each of which was completely unrelated to the response. As shown in the
figure, the model R2 increases to 1 as the number of features included in the
model increases, and correspondingly the training set MSE decreases to 0
as the number of features increases, even though the features are completely
unrelated to the response. On the other hand, the MSE on an independent
test set becomes extremely large as the number of features included in the
model increases, because including the additional predictors leads to a vast
increase in the variance of the coeﬃcient estimates. Looking at the test
set MSE, it is clear that the best model contains at most a few variables.
However, someone who carelessly examines only the R2 or the training set
MSE might erroneously conclude that the model with the greatest number
264         6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

      1.0

                                                 0.8
      0.8                                                                               500




                                  Training MSE
                                                 0.6



                                                                             Test MSE
      0.6
 R2                                                                                     50
                                                 0.4
      0.4

                                                 0.2                                    5
      0.2

                                                 0.0                                    1

               5    10    15                              5    10    15                          5    10    15

            Number of Variables                        Number of Variables                    Number of Variables


FIGURE 6.23. On a simulated example with n = 20 training observations,
features that are completely unrelated to the outcome are added to the model.
Left: The R2 increases to 1 as more features are included. Center: The training
set MSE decreases to 0 as more features are included. Right: The test set MSE
increases as more features are included.

of variables is best. This indicates the importance of applying extra care
when analyzing data sets with a large number of variables, and of always
evaluating model performance on an independent test set.
   In Section 6.1.3, we saw a number of approaches for adjusting the training
set RSS or R2 in order to account for the number of variables used to fit
a least squares model. Unfortunately, the Cp , AIC, and BIC approaches
are not appropriate in the high-dimensional setting, because estimating σ̂ 2
is problematic. (For instance, the formula for σ̂ 2 from Chapter 3 yields an
estimate σ̂ 2 = 0 in this setting.) Similarly, problems arise in the application
of adjusted R2 in the high-dimensional setting, since one can easily obtain
a model with an adjusted R2 value of 1. Clearly, alternative approaches
that are better-suited to the high-dimensional setting are required.


6.4.3 Regression in High Dimensions
It turns out that many of the methods seen in this chapter for fitting
less flexible least squares models, such as forward stepwise selection, ridge
regression, the lasso, and principal components regression, are particularly
useful for performing regression in the high-dimensional setting. Essentially,
these approaches avoid overfitting by using a less flexible fitting approach
than least squares.
   Figure 6.24 illustrates the performance of the lasso in a simple simulated
example. There are p = 20, 50, or 2,000 features, of which 20 are truly
associated with the outcome. The lasso was performed on n = 100 training
observations, and the mean squared error was evaluated on an independent
test set. As the number of features increases, the test set error increases.
When p = 20, the lowest validation set error was achieved when λ in
(6.7) was small; however, when p was larger then the lowest validation
                                  6.4 Considerations in High Dimensions           265


           p = 20                     p = 50                     p = 2000
5                          5                          5



4                          4                          4



3                          3                          3



2                          2                          2



1                          1                          1



0                          0                          0

      1      16      21          1      28      51           1      70      111

     Degrees of Freedom         Degrees of Freedom         Degrees of Freedom

FIGURE 6.24. The lasso was performed with n = 100 observations and three
values of p, the number of features. Of the p features, 20 were associated with
the response. The boxplots show the test MSEs that result using three diﬀerent
values of the tuning parameter λ in (6.7). For ease of interpretation, rather than
reporting λ, the degrees of freedom are reported; for the lasso this turns out
to be simply the number of estimated non-zero coeﬃcients. When p = 20, the
lowest test MSE was obtained with the smallest amount of regularization. When
p = 50, the lowest test MSE was achieved when there is a substantial amount
of regularization. When p = 2,000 the lasso performed poorly regardless of the
amount of regularization, due to the fact that only 20 of the 2,000 features truly
are associated with the outcome.


set error was achieved using a larger value of λ. In each boxplot, rather
than reporting the values of λ used, the degrees of freedom of the resulting
lasso solution is displayed; this is simply the number of non-zero coeﬃcient
estimates in the lasso solution, and is a measure of the flexibility of the
lasso fit. Figure 6.24 highlights three important points: (1) regularization
or shrinkage plays a key role in high-dimensional problems, (2) appropriate
tuning parameter selection is crucial for good predictive performance, and
(3) the test error tends to increase as the dimensionality of the problem
(i.e. the number of features or predictors) increases, unless the additional
features are truly associated with the response.
   The third point above is in fact a key principle in the analysis of high-
dimensional data, which is known as the curse of dimensionality. One might
                                                                             curse of di-
think that as the number of features used to fit a model increases, the mensionality
quality of the fitted model will increase as well. However, comparing the
left-hand and right-hand panels in Figure 6.24, we see that this is not
necessarily the case: in this example, the test set MSE almost doubles as
p increases from 20 to 2,000. In general, adding additional signal features
that are truly associated with the response will improve the fitted model,
in the sense of leading to a reduction in test set error. However, adding
266     6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

noise features that are not truly associated with the response will lead
to a deterioration in the fitted model, and consequently an increased test
set error. This is because noise features increase the dimensionality of the
problem, exacerbating the risk of overfitting (since noise features may be
assigned nonzero coeﬃcients due to chance associations with the response
on the training set) without any potential upside in terms of improved test
set error. Thus, we see that new technologies that allow for the collection
of measurements for thousands or millions of features are a double-edged
sword: they can lead to improved predictive models if these features are in
fact relevant to the problem at hand, but will lead to worse results if the
features are not relevant. Even if they are relevant, the variance incurred
in fitting their coeﬃcients may outweigh the reduction in bias that they
bring.



6.4.4 Interpreting Results in High Dimensions
When we perform the lasso, ridge regression, or other regression proce-
dures in the high-dimensional setting, we must be quite cautious in the way
that we report the results obtained. In Chapter 3, we learned about multi-
collinearity, the concept that the variables in a regression might be corre-
lated with each other. In the high-dimensional setting, the multicollinearity
problem is extreme: any variable in the model can be written as a linear
combination of all of the other variables in the model. Essentially, this
means that we can never know exactly which variables (if any) truly are
predictive of the outcome, and we can never identify the best coeﬃcients
for use in the regression. At most, we can hope to assign large regression
coeﬃcients to variables that are correlated with the variables that truly are
predictive of the outcome.
   For instance, suppose that we are trying to predict blood pressure on the
basis of half a million SNPs, and that forward stepwise selection indicates
that 17 of those SNPs lead to a good predictive model on the training data.
It would be incorrect to conclude that these 17 SNPs predict blood pressure
more eﬀectively than the other SNPs not included in the model. There are
likely to be many sets of 17 SNPs that would predict blood pressure just
as well as the selected model. If we were to obtain an independent data set
and perform forward stepwise selection on that data set, we would likely
obtain a model containing a diﬀerent, and perhaps even non-overlapping,
set of SNPs. This does not detract from the value of the model obtained—
for instance, the model might turn out to be very eﬀective in predicting
blood pressure on an independent set of patients, and might be clinically
useful for physicians. But we must be careful not to overstate the results
obtained, and to make it clear that what we have identified is simply one
of many possible models for predicting blood pressure, and that it must be
further validated on independent data sets.
                     6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization Methods       267

   It is also important to be particularly careful in reporting errors and
measures of model fit in the high-dimensional setting. We have seen that
when p > n, it is easy to obtain a useless model that has zero residu-
als. Therefore, one should never use sum of squared errors, p-values, R2
statistics, or other traditional measures of model fit on the training data as
evidence of a good model fit in the high-dimensional setting. For instance,
as we saw in Figure 6.23, one can easily obtain a model with R2 = 1 when
p > n. Reporting this fact might mislead others into thinking that a sta-
tistically valid and useful model has been obtained, whereas in fact this
provides absolutely no evidence of a compelling model. It is important to
instead report results on an independent test set, or cross-validation errors.
For instance, the MSE or R2 on an independent test set is a valid measure
of model fit, but the MSE on the training set certainly is not.



6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization
    Methods
6.5.1 Subset Selection Methods
Best Subset Selection
Here we apply the best subset selection approach to the Hitters data. We
wish to predict a baseball player’s Salary on the basis of various statistics
associated with performance in the previous year.
   First of all, we note that the Salary variable is missing for some of the
players. The is.na() function can be used to identify the missing observa-
                                                                               is.na()
tions. It returns a vector of the same length as the input vector, with a TRUE
for any elements that are missing, and a FALSE for non-missing elements.
The sum() function can then be used to count all of the missing elements.
                                                                                   sum()
> library ( ISLR2 )
> View ( Hitters )
> names ( Hitters )
 [1] " AtBat "         " Hits "          " HmRun "    " Runs "     " RBI "
 [6] " Walks "         " Years "         " CAtBat "   " CHits "    " CHmRun "
[11] " CRuns "         " CRBI "          " CWalks "   " League "   " Division "
[16] " PutOuts "       " Assists "       " Errors "   " Salary "   " NewLeague "
> dim ( Hitters )
[1] 322 20
> sum ( is . na ( Hitters $ Salary ) )
[1] 59

Hence we see that Salary is missing for 59 players. The na.omit() function
removes all of the rows that have missing values in any variable.
> Hitters <- na . omit ( Hitters )
> dim ( Hitters )
[1] 263 20
268      6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

> sum ( is . na ( Hitters ) )
[1] 0

   The regsubsets() function (part of the leaps library) performs best sub-
                                                                            regsubsets()
set selection by identifying the best model that contains a given number
of predictors, where best is quantified using RSS. The syntax is the same
as for lm(). The summary() command outputs the best set of variables for
each model size.
> library ( leaps )
> regfit . full <- regsubsets ( Salary ∼ . , Hitters )
> summary ( regfit . full )
Subset selection object
Call : regsubsets . formula ( Salary ∼ . , Hitters )
19 Variables ( and intercept )
...
1 subsets of each size up to 8
Selection Algorithm : exhaustive
           AtBat Hits HmRun Runs RBI Walks Years CAtBat CHits
1 ( 1 ) " "       " " " "       " " " " " "    " "   " "   " "
2 ( 1 ) " "       "*" " "       " " " " " "    " "   " "   " "
3 ( 1 ) " "       "*" " "       " " " " " "    " "   " "   " "
4 ( 1 ) " "       "*" " "       " " " " " "    " "   " "   " "
5 ( 1 ) "*"       "*" " "       " " " " " "    " "   " "   " "
6 ( 1 ) "*"       "*" " "       " " " " "*"    " "   " "   " "
7 ( 1 ) " "       "*" " "       " " " " "*"    " "   "*"   "*"
8 ( 1 ) "*"       "*" " "       " " " " "*"    " "   " "   " "
           CHmRun CRuns CRBI CWalks LeagueN DivisionW PutOuts
1 ( 1 ) " "         " "     "*" " "    " "      " "      " "
2 ( 1 ) " "         " "     "*" " "    " "      " "      " "
3 ( 1 ) " "         " "     "*" " "    " "      " "      "*"
4 ( 1 ) " "         " "     "*" " "    " "      "*"      "*"
5 ( 1 ) " "         " "     "*" " "    " "      "*"      "*"
6 ( 1 ) " "         " "     "*" " "    " "      "*"      "*"
7 ( 1 ) "*"         " "     " " " "    " "      "*"      "*"
8 ( 1 ) "*"         "*"     " " "*"    " "      "*"      "*"
           Assists Errors NewLeagueN
1 ( 1 ) " "          " "      " "
2 ( 1 ) " "          " "      " "
3 ( 1 ) " "          " "      " "
4 ( 1 ) " "          " "      " "
5 ( 1 ) " "          " "      " "
6 ( 1 ) " "          " "      " "
7 ( 1 ) " "          " "      " "
8 ( 1 ) " "          " "      " "

An asterisk indicates that a given variable is included in the corresponding
model. For instance, this output indicates that the best two-variable model
contains only Hits and CRBI. By default, regsubsets() only reports results
up to the best eight-variable model. But the nvmax option can be used
in order to return as many variables as are desired. Here we fit up to a
19-variable model.
                   6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization Methods    269

> regfit . full <- regsubsets ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters ,
    nvmax = 19)
> reg . summary <- summary ( regfit . full )

 The summary() function also returns R2 , RSS, adjusted R2 , Cp , and BIC.
We can examine these to try to select the best overall model.
> names ( reg . summary )
[1] " which " " rsq "       " rss "   " adjr2 "   " cp "    " bic "
[7] " outmat " " obj "

For instance, we see that the R2 statistic increases from 32 %, when only
one variable is included in the model, to almost 55 %, when all variables
are included. As expected, the R2 statistic increases monotonically as more
variables are included.
> reg . summary $ rsq
 [1] 0.321 0.425 0.451 0.475 0.491 0.509 0.514 0.529 0.535
[10] 0.540 0.543 0.544 0.544 0.545 0.545 0.546 0.546 0.546
[19] 0.546

Plotting RSS, adjusted R2 , Cp , and BIC for all of the models at once will
help us decide which model to select. Note the type = "l" option tells R to
connect the plotted points with lines.
> par ( mfrow = c (2 , 2) )
> plot ( reg . summary $ rss , xlab = " Number of Variables " ,
    ylab = " RSS " , type = " l " )
> plot ( reg . summary $ adjr2 , xlab = " Number of Variables " ,
    ylab = " Adjusted RSq " , type = " l " )

The points() command works like the plot() command, except that it
                                                                           points()
puts points on a plot that has already been created, instead of creating a
new plot. The which.max() function can be used to identify the location of
the maximum point of a vector. We will now plot a red dot to indicate the
model with the largest adjusted R2 statistic.
> which . max ( reg . summary $ adjr2 )
[1] 11
> points (11 , reg . summary $ adjr2 [11] , col = " red " , cex = 2 ,
    pch = 20)

In a similar fashion we can plot the Cp and BIC statistics, and indicate the
models with the smallest statistic using which.min().
                                                                               which.min()
> plot ( reg . summary $ cp , xlab = " Number of Variables " ,
    ylab = " Cp " , type = " l " )
> which . min ( reg . summary $ cp )
[1] 10
> points (10 , reg . summary $ cp [10] , col = " red " , cex = 2 ,
    pch = 20)
> which . min ( reg . summary $ bic )
[1] 6
> plot ( reg . summary $ bic , xlab = " Number of Variables " ,
    ylab = " BIC " , type = " l " )
270       6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

> points (6 , reg . summary $ bic [6] , col = " red " , cex = 2 ,
    pch = 20)

  The regsubsets() function has a built-in plot() command which can
be used to display the selected variables for the best model with a given
number of predictors, ranked according to the BIC, Cp , adjusted R2 , or
AIC. To find out more about this function, type ?plot.regsubsets.
>   plot ( regfit . full ,   scale   =   " r2 " )
>   plot ( regfit . full ,   scale   =   " adjr2 " )
>   plot ( regfit . full ,   scale   =   " Cp " )
>   plot ( regfit . full ,   scale   =   " bic " )

The top row of each plot contains a black square for each variable selected
according to the optimal model associated with that statistic. For instance,
we see that several models share a BIC close to −150. However, the model
with the lowest BIC is the six-variable model that contains only AtBat,
Hits, Walks, CRBI, DivisionW, and PutOuts. We can use the coef() function
to see the coeﬃcient estimates associated with this model.
> coef ( regfit . full , 6)
( Intercept )          AtBat                Hits        Walks        CRBI
      91.512         -1.869                7.604        3.698       0.643
   DivisionW        PutOuts
    -122.952           0.264


Forward and Backward Stepwise Selection
We can also use the regsubsets() function to perform forward stepwise
or backward stepwise selection, using the argument method = "forward" or
method = "backward".
> regfit . fwd <- regsubsets ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters ,
    nvmax = 19 , method = " forward " )
> summary ( regfit . fwd )
> regfit . bwd <- regsubsets ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters ,
    nvmax = 19 , method = " backward " )
> summary ( regfit . bwd )

For instance, we see that using forward stepwise selection, the best one-
variable model contains only CRBI, and the best two-variable model ad-
ditionally includes Hits. For this data, the best one-variable through six-
variable models are each identical for best subset and forward selection.
However, the best seven-variable models identified by forward stepwise se-
lection, backward stepwise selection, and best subset selection are diﬀerent.
> coef ( regfit . full , 7)
( Intercept )           Hits               Walks       CAtBat       CHits
      79.451           1.283               3.227       -0.375       1.496
      CHmRun      DivisionW              PutOuts
       1.442       -129.987                0.237
> coef ( regfit . fwd , 7)
                   6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization Methods      271

( Intercept )          AtBat         Hits          Walks           CRBI
     109.787          -1.959        7.450          4.913          0.854
      CWalks      DivisionW       PutOuts
      -0.305       -127.122         0.253
> coef ( regfit . bwd , 7)
( Intercept )          AtBat         Hits          Walks          CRuns
     105.649          -1.976        6.757          6.056          1.129
      CWalks      DivisionW       PutOuts
      -0.716       -116.169         0.303


Choosing Among Models Using the Validation-Set Approach and
Cross-Validation
We just saw that it is possible to choose among a set of models of diﬀerent
sizes using Cp , BIC, and adjusted R2 . We will now consider how to do this
using the validation set and cross-validation approaches.
   In order for these approaches to yield accurate estimates of the test
error, we must use only the training observations to perform all aspects of
model-fitting—including variable selection. Therefore, the determination of
which model of a given size is best must be made using only the training
observations. This point is subtle but important. If the full data set is used
to perform the best subset selection step, the validation set errors and
cross-validation errors that we obtain will not be accurate estimates of the
test error.
   In order to use the validation set approach, we begin by splitting the
observations into a training set and a test set. We do this by creating
a random vector, train, of elements equal to TRUE if the corresponding
observation is in the training set, and FALSE otherwise. The vector test has
a TRUE if the observation is in the test set, and a FALSE otherwise. Note the
! in the command to create test causes TRUEs to be switched to FALSEs and
vice versa. We also set a random seed so that the user will obtain the same
training set/test set split.
> set.seed (1)
> train <- sample ( c ( TRUE , FALSE ) , nrow ( Hitters ) ,
    replace = TRUE )
> test <- (! train )

Now, we apply regsubsets() to the training set in order to perform best
subset selection.
> regfit . best <- regsubsets ( Salary ∼ . ,
    data = Hitters [ train , ] , nvmax = 19)

Notice that we subset the Hitters data frame directly in the call in or-
der to access only the training subset of the data, using the expression
Hitters[train, ]. We now compute the validation set error for the best
model of each model size. We first make a model matrix from the test
data.
272       6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

> test . mat <- model . matrix ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters [ test , ])

The model.matrix() function is used in many regression packages for build-
                                                                           model.matrix()
ing an “X” matrix from data. Now we run a loop, and for each size i, we
extract the coeﬃcients from regfit.best for the best model of that size,
multiply them into the appropriate columns of the test model matrix to
form the predictions, and compute the test MSE.
> val . errors <- rep ( NA , 19)
> for ( i in 1:19) {
+ coefi <- coef ( regfit . best , id = i )
+ pred <- test . mat [ , names ( coefi ) ] %*% coefi
+ val . errors [ i ] <- mean (( Hitters $ Salary [ test ] - pred ) ^2)
}

We find that the best model is the one that contains seven variables.
> val . errors
  [1] 164377 144405 152176 145198 137902 139176 126849 136191
  [9] 132890 135435 136963 140695 140691 141951 141508 142164
[17] 141767 142340 142238
> which . min ( val . errors )
[1] 7
> coef ( regfit . best , 7)
( Intercept )           AtBat     Hits     Walks       CRuns
      67.109           -2.146    7.015     8.072       1.243
      CWalks      DivisionW    PutOuts
      -0.834        -118.436     0.253

  This was a little tedious, partly because there is no predict() method
for regsubsets(). Since we will be using this function again, we can capture
our steps above and write our own predict method.
>     predict . regsubsets <- function ( object , newdata , id , ...) {
+       form <- as . formula ( object $ call [[2]])
+       mat <- model . matrix ( form , newdata )
+       coefi <- coef ( object , id = id )
+       xvars <- names ( coefi )
+       mat [ , xvars ] %*% coefi
+     }

Our function pretty much mimics what we did above. The only complex
part is how we extracted the formula used in the call to regsubsets(). We
demonstrate how we use this function below, when we do cross-validation.
   Finally, we perform best subset selection on the full data set, and select
the best seven-variable model. It is important that we make use of the
full data set in order to obtain more accurate coeﬃcient estimates. Note
that we perform best subset selection on the full data set and select the
best seven-variable model, rather than simply using the variables that were
obtained from the training set, because the best seven-variable model on
the full data set may diﬀer from the corresponding model on the training
set.
                    6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization Methods     273

> regfit . best <- regsubsets ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters ,
     nvmax = 19)
> coef ( regfit . best , 7)
( Intercept )           Hits      Walks       CAtBat        CHits
      79.451           1.283      3.227       -0.375        1.496
      CHmRun      DivisionW     PutOuts
       1.442       -129.987       0.237

In fact, we see that the best seven-variable model on the full data set has a
diﬀerent set of variables than the best seven-variable model on the training
set.
  We now try to choose among the models of diﬀerent sizes using cross-
validation. This approach is somewhat involved, as we must perform best
subset selection within each of the k training sets. Despite this, we see that
with its clever subsetting syntax, R makes this job quite easy. First, we
create a vector that allocates each observation to one of k = 10 folds, and
we create a matrix in which we will store the results.
>   k <- 10
>   n <- nrow ( Hitters )
>   set.seed (1)
>   folds <- sample ( rep (1: k , length = n ) )
>   cv . errors <- matrix ( NA , k , 19 ,
       dimnames = list ( NULL , paste (1:19) ) )

Now we write a for loop that performs cross-validation. In the jth fold, the
elements of folds that equal j are in the test set, and the remainder are in
the training set. We make our predictions for each model size (using our new
predict() method), compute the test errors on the appropriate subset, and
store them in the appropriate slot in the matrix cv.errors. Note that in the
following code R will automatically use our predict.regsubsets() function
when we call predict() because the best.fit object has class regsubsets.
> for ( j in 1: k ) {
+   best . fit <- regsubsets ( Salary ∼ . ,
        data = Hitters [ folds != j , ] ,
        nvmax = 19)
+   for ( i in 1:19) {
+      pred <- predict ( best . fit , Hitters [ folds == j , ] , id = i )
+      cv . errors [j , i ] <-
            mean (( Hitters $ Salary [ folds == j ] - pred ) ^2)
+    }
+ }

This has given us a 10×19 matrix, of which the (j, i)th element corresponds
to the test MSE for the jth cross-validation fold for the best i-variable
model. We use the apply() function to average over the columns of this
                                                                            apply()
matrix in order to obtain a vector for which the ith element is the cross-
validation error for the i-variable model.
> mean . cv . errors <- apply ( cv . errors , 2 , mean )
> mean . cv . errors
274     6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

      1         2        3       4         5  6  7    8
143440 126817 134214 131783 130766 120383 121443 114364
      9       10        11      12       13  14 15   16
115163 109366 112738 113617 115558 115853 115631 116050
    17        18        19
116117 116419 116299
> par ( mfrow = c (1 , 1) )
> plot ( mean . cv . errors , type = " b " )

We see that cross-validation selects a 10-variable model. We now perform
best subset selection on the full data set in order to obtain the 10-variable
model.
> reg . best <- regsubsets ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters ,
     nvmax = 19)
> coef ( reg . best , 10)
( Intercept )          AtBat       Hits        Walks        CAtBat
     162.535          -2.169      6.918        5.773        -0.130
        CRuns           CRBI     CWalks    DivisionW       PutOuts
        1.408          0.774     -0.831     -112.380         0.297
     Assists
        0.283




6.5.2 Ridge Regression and the Lasso
We will use the glmnet package in order to perform ridge regression and
the lasso. The main function in this package is glmnet(), which can be used
                                                                            glmnet()
to fit ridge regression models, lasso models, and more. This function has
slightly diﬀerent syntax from other model-fitting functions that we have
encountered thus far in this book. In particular, we must pass in an x
matrix as well as a y vector, and we do not use the y ∼ x syntax. We will
now perform ridge regression and the lasso in order to predict Salary on
the Hitters data. Before proceeding ensure that the missing values have
been removed from the data, as described in Section 6.5.1.
> x <- model . matrix ( Salary ∼ . , Hitters ) [ , -1]
> y <- Hitters $ Salary

The model.matrix() function is particularly useful for creating x; not only
does it produce a matrix corresponding to the 19 predictors but it also
automatically transforms any qualitative variables into dummy variables.
The latter property is important because glmnet() can only take numerical,
quantitative inputs.

Ridge Regression
The glmnet() function has an alpha argument that determines what type
of model is fit. If alpha=0 then a ridge regression model is fit, and if alpha=1
then a lasso model is fit. We first fit a ridge regression model.
                     6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization Methods      275

> library ( glmnet )
> grid <- 10^ seq (10 , -2 , length = 100)
> ridge . mod <- glmnet (x , y , alpha = 0 , lambda = grid )

By default the glmnet() function performs ridge regression for an automati-
cally selected range of λ values. However, here we have chosen to implement
the function over a grid of values ranging from λ = 1010 to λ = 10−2 , es-
sentially covering the full range of scenarios from the null model containing
only the intercept, to the least squares fit. As we will see, we can also com-
pute model fits for a particular value of λ that is not one of the original
grid values. Note that by default, the glmnet() function standardizes the
variables so that they are on the same scale. To turn oﬀ this default setting,
use the argument standardize = FALSE.
  Associated with each value of λ is a vector of ridge regression coeﬃcients,
stored in a matrix that can be accessed by coef(). In this case, it is a 20×100
matrix, with 20 rows (one for each predictor, plus an intercept) and 100
columns (one for each value of λ).
> dim ( coef ( ridge . mod ) )
[1] 20 100

We expect the coeﬃcient estimates to be much smaller, in terms of ℓ2 norm,
when a large value of λ is used, as compared to when a small value of λ is
used. These are the coeﬃcients when λ = 11,498, along with their ℓ2 norm:
> ridge . mod $ lambda [50]
[1] 11498
> coef ( ridge . mod ) [ , 50]
( Intercept )            AtBat             Hits        HmRun         Runs
     407.356             0.037            0.138        0.525        0.231
          RBI            Walks            Years       CAtBat        CHits
       0.240             0.290            1.108        0.003        0.012
      CHmRun             CRuns             CRBI       CWalks      LeagueN
       0.088             0.023            0.024        0.025        0.085
   DivisionW          PutOuts          Assists        Errors   NewLeagueN
      -6.215             0.016            0.003       -0.021        0.301
> sqrt ( sum ( coef ( ridge . mod ) [ -1 , 50]^2) )
[1] 6.36

In contrast, here are the coeﬃcients when λ = 705, along with their ℓ2
norm. Note the much larger ℓ2 norm of the coeﬃcients associated with this
smaller value of λ.
> ridge . mod $ lambda [60]
[1] 705
> coef ( ridge . mod ) [ , 60]
( Intercept )            AtBat           Hits          HmRun         Runs
      54.325             0.112          0.656          1.180        0.938
          RBI            Walks          Years         CAtBat        CHits
       0.847             1.320          2.596          0.011        0.047
      CHmRun             CRuns           CRBI         CWalks      LeagueN
       0.338             0.094          0.098          0.072       13.684
276       6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

  DivisionW           PutOuts          Assists         Errors   NewLeagueN
    -54.659             0.119             0.016        -0.704        8.612
> sqrt ( sum ( coef ( ridge . mod ) [ -1 , 60]^2) )
[1] 57.1

We can use the predict() function for a number of purposes. For instance,
we can obtain the ridge regression coeﬃcients for a new value of λ, say 50:
> predict ( ridge . mod , s = 50 , type = " coefficients " ) [1:20 , ]
( Intercept )         AtBat          Hits        HmRun           Runs
      48.766         -0.358         1.969       -1.278          1.146
         RBI          Walks         Years       CAtBat          CHits
       0.804          2.716        -6.218        0.005          0.106
      CHmRun          CRuns          CRBI       CWalks        LeagueN
       0.624          0.221         0.219       -0.150         45.926
   DivisionW        PutOuts       Assists       Errors NewLeagueN
    -118.201          0.250         0.122       -3.279         -9.497

  We now split the samples into a training set and a test set in order
to estimate the test error of ridge regression and the lasso. There are two
common ways to randomly split a data set. The first is to produce a random
vector of TRUE, FALSE elements and select the observations corresponding to
TRUE for the training data. The second is to randomly choose a subset of
numbers between 1 and n; these can then be used as the indices for the
training observations. The two approaches work equally well. We used the
former method in Section 6.5.1. Here we demonstrate the latter approach.
  We first set a random seed so that the results obtained will be repro-
ducible.
>   set.seed (1)
>   train <- sample (1: nrow ( x ) , nrow ( x ) / 2)
>   test <- ( - train )
>   y . test <- y [ test ]

Next we fit a ridge regression model on the training set, and evaluate
its MSE on the test set, using λ = 4. Note the use of the predict()
function again. This time we get predictions for a test set, by replacing
type="coefficients" with the newx argument.
> ridge . mod <- glmnet ( x [ train , ] , y [ train ] , alpha = 0 ,
    lambda = grid , thresh = 1e -12)
> ridge . pred <- predict ( ridge . mod , s = 4 , newx = x [ test , ])
> mean (( ridge . pred - y . test ) ^2)
[1] 142199

The test MSE is 142,199. Note that if we had instead simply fit a model
with just an intercept, we would have predicted each test observation using
the mean of the training observations. In that case, we could compute the
test set MSE like this:
> mean (( mean ( y [ train ]) - y . test ) ^2)
[1] 224670
                    6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization Methods            277

We could also get the same result by fitting a ridge regression model with
a very large value of λ. Note that 1e10 means 1010 .
> ridge . pred <- predict ( ridge . mod , s = 1 e10 , newx = x [ test , ])
> mean (( ridge . pred - y . test ) ^2)
[1] 224670

So fitting a ridge regression model with λ = 4 leads to a much lower test
MSE than fitting a model with just an intercept. We now check whether
there is any benefit to performing ridge regression with λ = 4 instead of
just performing least squares regression. Recall that least squares is simply
ridge regression with λ = 0.8
> ridge . pred <- predict ( ridge . mod , s = 0 , newx = x [ test , ] ,
     exact = T , x = x [ train , ] , y = y [ train ])
> mean (( ridge . pred - y . test ) ^2)
[1] 168589
> lm ( y ∼ x , subset = train )
> predict ( ridge . mod , s = 0 , exact = T , type = " coefficients " ,
     x = x [ train , ] , y = y [ train ]) [1:20 , ]

In general, if we want to fit a (unpenalized) least squares model, then
we should use the lm() function, since that function provides more useful
outputs, such as standard errors and p-values for the coeﬃcients.
  In general, instead of arbitrarily choosing λ = 4, it would be better to
use cross-validation to choose the tuning parameter λ. We can do this using
the built-in cross-validation function, cv.glmnet(). By default, the function
                                                                              cv.glmnet()
performs ten-fold cross-validation, though this can be changed using the
argument nfolds. Note that we set a random seed first so our results will
be reproducible, since the choice of the cross-validation folds is random.
> set.seed (1)
> cv . out <- cv . glmnet ( x [ train , ] , y [ train ] , alpha = 0)
> plot ( cv . out )
> bestlam <- cv . out $ lambda . min
> bestlam
[1] 326

Therefore, we see that the value of λ that results in the smallest cross-
validation error is 326. What is the test MSE associated with this value of
λ?
> ridge . pred <- predict ( ridge . mod , s = bestlam ,
    newx = x [ test , ])


  8 In order for glmnet() to yield the exact least squares coeﬃcients when λ = 0,

we use the argument exact = T when calling the predict() function. Otherwise,
the predict() function will interpolate over the grid of λ values used in fitting the
glmnet() model, yielding approximate results. When we use exact = T, there remains
a slight discrepancy in the third decimal place between the output of glmnet() when
λ = 0 and the output of lm(); this is due to numerical approximation on the part of
glmnet().
278     6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

> mean (( ridge . pred - y . test ) ^2)
[1] 139857

This represents a further improvement over the test MSE that we got using
λ = 4. Finally, we refit our ridge regression model on the full data set,
using the value of λ chosen by cross-validation, and examine the coeﬃcient
estimates.
> out <- glmnet (x , y , alpha = 0)
> predict ( out , type = " coefficients " , s = bestlam ) [1:20 , ]
( Intercept )        AtBat         Hits         HmRun           Runs
       15.44          0.08         0.86          0.60           1.06
         RBI         Walks        Years        CAtBat         CHits
        0.88          1.62         1.35          0.01           0.06
      CHmRun         CRuns         CRBI        CWalks       LeagueN
        0.41          0.11         0.12          0.05         22.09
   DivisionW       PutOuts      Assists        Errors NewLeagueN
      -79.04          0.17         0.03         -1.36           9.12

As expected, none of the coeﬃcients are zero—ridge regression does not
perform variable selection!

The Lasso
We saw that ridge regression with a wise choice of λ can outperform least
squares as well as the null model on the Hitters data set. We now ask
whether the lasso can yield either a more accurate or a more interpretable
model than ridge regression. In order to fit a lasso model, we once again
use the glmnet() function; however, this time we use the argument alpha=1.
Other than that change, we proceed just as we did in fitting a ridge model.
> lasso . mod <- glmnet ( x [ train , ] , y [ train ] , alpha = 1 ,
    lambda = grid )
> plot ( lasso . mod )

We can see from the coeﬃcient plot that depending on the choice of tuning
parameter, some of the coeﬃcients will be exactly equal to zero. We now
perform cross-validation and compute the associated test error.
> set.seed (1)
> cv . out <- cv . glmnet ( x [ train , ] , y [ train ] , alpha = 1)
> plot ( cv . out )
> bestlam <- cv . out $ lambda . min
> lasso . pred <- predict ( lasso . mod , s = bestlam ,
     newx = x [ test , ])
> mean (( lasso . pred - y . test ) ^2)
[1] 143674

This is substantially lower than the test set MSE of the null model and of
least squares, and very similar to the test MSE of ridge regression with λ
chosen by cross-validation.
   However, the lasso has a substantial advantage over ridge regression in
that the resulting coeﬃcient estimates are sparse. Here we see that 8 of the
                  6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization Methods      279

19 coeﬃcient estimates are exactly zero. So the lasso model with λ chosen
by cross-validation contains only eleven variables.
> out <- glmnet (x , y , alpha = 1 , lambda = grid )
> lasso . coef <- predict ( out , type = " coefficients " ,
     s = bestlam ) [1:20 , ]
> lasso . coef
( Intercept )          AtBat         Hits       HmRun          Runs
        1.27           -0.05         2.18        0.00          0.00
          RBI          Walks        Years      CAtBat         CHits
        0.00             2.29       -0.34        0.00          0.00
      CHmRun           CRuns         CRBI      CWalks       LeagueN
        0.03             0.22        0.42        0.00         20.29
   DivisionW        PutOuts       Assists      Errors NewLeagueN
     -116.17             0.24        0.00       -0.86          0.00
> lasso . coef [ lasso . coef != 0]
( Intercept )          AtBat         Hits       Walks         Years
        1.27           -0.05         2.18        2.29         -0.34
      CHmRun           CRuns         CRBI     LeagueN     DivisionW
        0.03             0.22        0.42       20.29       -116.17
     PutOuts         Errors
        0.24           -0.86



6.5.3 PCR and PLS Regression
Principal Components Regression
Principal components regression (PCR) can be performed using the pcr()
                                                                            pcr()
function, which is part of the pls library. We now apply PCR to the Hitters
data, in order to predict Salary. Again, we ensure that the missing values
have been removed from the data, as described in Section 6.5.1.
> library ( pls )
> set.seed (2)
> pcr . fit <- pcr ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters , scale = TRUE ,
    validation = " CV " )

The syntax for the pcr() function is similar to that for lm(), with a few
additional options. Setting scale = TRUE has the eﬀect of standardizing each
predictor, using (6.6), prior to generating the principal components, so that
the scale on which each variable is measured will not have an eﬀect. Setting
validation = "CV" causes pcr() to compute the ten-fold cross-validation
error for each possible value of M , the number of principal components
used. The resulting fit can be examined using summary().
> summary ( pcr . fit )
Data :  X dimension : 263 19
        Y dimension : 263 1
Fit method : svdpc
Number of components considered : 19

VALIDATION : RMSEP
280     6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

Cross - validated using     10 random segments .
         ( Intercept ) 1    comps 2 comps 3 comps             4 comps
CV                452       351.9    353.2     355.0            352.8
adjCV             452       351.6    352.7     354.4            352.1
...

TRAINING :   % variance explained
         1   comps 2 comps 3 comps          4 comps        5 comps
X            38.31    60.16    70.84          79.03          84.29
Salary       40.63    41.58    42.17          43.22          44.90
...

The CV score is provided for each possible number of components, ranging
from M = 0 onwards. (We have printed the CV output only up to M = 4.)
Note that pcr() reports the root mean squared error ; in order to obtain
the usual MSE, we must square this quantity. For instance, a root mean
squared error of 352.8 corresponds to an MSE of 352.82 = 124,468.
   One can also plot the cross-validation scores using the validationplot()
                                                                            validationplot()
function. Using val.type = "MSEP" will cause the cross-validation MSE to
be plotted.
> vali dationpl ot ( pcr . fit , val . type = " MSEP " )

We see that the smallest cross-validation error occurs when M = 18 com-
ponents are used. This is barely fewer than M = 19, which amounts to
simply performing least squares, because when all of the components are
used in PCR no dimension reduction occurs. However, from the plot we
also see that the cross-validation error is roughly the same when only one
component is included in the model. This suggests that a model that uses
just a small number of components might suﬃce.
   The summary() function also provides the percentage of variance explained
in the predictors and in the response using diﬀerent numbers of compo-
nents. This concept is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 12. Briefly,
we can think of this as the amount of information about the predictors or
the response that is captured using M principal components. For example,
setting M = 1 only captures 38.31 % of all the variance, or information, in
the predictors. In contrast, using M = 5 increases the value to 84.29 %. If
we were to use all M = p = 19 components, this would increase to 100 %.
   We now perform PCR on the training data and evaluate its test set
performance.
> set.seed (1)
> pcr . fit <- pcr ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters , subset = train ,
    scale = TRUE , validation = " CV " )
> vali dationpl ot ( pcr . fit , val . type = " MSEP " )

Now we find that the lowest cross-validation error occurs when M = 5
components are used. We compute the test MSE as follows.
> pcr . pred <- predict ( pcr . fit , x [ test , ] , ncomp = 5)
> mean (( pcr . pred - y . test ) ^2)
                   6.5 Lab: Linear Models and Regularization Methods    281

[1] 142812

This test set MSE is competitive with the results obtained using ridge re-
gression and the lasso. However, as a result of the way PCR is implemented,
the final model is more diﬃcult to interpret because it does not perform
any kind of variable selection or even directly produce coeﬃcient estimates.
  Finally, we fit PCR on the full data set, using M = 5, the number of
components identified by cross-validation.
> pcr . fit <- pcr ( y ∼ x , scale = TRUE , ncomp = 5)
> summary ( pcr . fit )
Data :    X dimension : 263 19
          Y dimension : 263 1
Fit method : svdpc
Number of components considered : 5
TRAINING : % variance explained
   1 comps 2 comps 3 comps 4 comps 5 comps
X      38.31      60.16     70.84    79.03     84.29
y      40.63      41.58     42.17    43.22     44.90


Partial Least Squares
We implement partial least squares (PLS) using the plsr() function, also
                                                                         plsr()
in the pls library. The syntax is just like that of the pcr() function.
> set.seed (1)
> pls . fit <- plsr ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters , subset = train ,
     scale = TRUE , validation = " CV " )
> summary ( pls . fit )
Data :    X dimension : 131 19
     Y dimension : 131 1
Fit method : kernelpls
Number of components considered : 19

VALIDATION : RMSEP
Cross - validated using    10 random segments .
         ( Intercept ) 1   comps 2 comps 3 comps         4 comps
CV              428.3      325.5    329.9     328.8        339.0
adjCV           428.3      325.0    328.2     327.2        336.6
...

TRAINING : % variance explained
         1 comps 2 comps 3 comps 4 comps 5 comps
X          39.13       48.80       60.09      75.07      78.58
Salary     46.36       50.72       52.23      53.03      54.07
...
> vali dationpl ot ( pls . fit , val . type = " MSEP " )

The lowest cross-validation error occurs when only M = 1 partial least
squares directions are used. We now evaluate the corresponding test set
MSE.
> pls . pred <- predict ( pls . fit , x [ test , ] , ncomp = 1)
282     6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

> mean (( pls . pred - y . test ) ^2)
[1] 151995

The test MSE is comparable to, but slightly higher than, the test MSE
obtained using ridge regression, the lasso, and PCR.
   Finally, we perform PLS using the full data set, using M = 1, the number
of components identified by cross-validation.
> pls . fit <- plsr ( Salary ∼ . , data = Hitters , scale = TRUE ,
     ncomp = 1)
> summary ( pls . fit )
Data :    X dimension : 263 19
          Y dimension : 263 1
Fit method : kernelpls
Number of components considered : 1
TRAINING : % variance explained
          1 comps
X           38.08
Salary      43.05

Notice that the percentage of variance in Salary that the one-component
PLS fit explains, 43.05 %, is almost as much as that explained using the final
five-component model PCR fit, 44.90 %. This is because PCR only attempts
to maximize the amount of variance explained in the predictors, while PLS
searches for directions that explain variance in both the predictors and the
response.



6.6 Exercises
Conceptual
  1. We perform best subset, forward stepwise, and backward stepwise
     selection on a single data set. For each approach, we obtain p + 1
     models, containing 0, 1, 2, . . . , p predictors. Explain your answers:

       (a) Which of the three models with k predictors has the smallest
           training RSS?
       (b) Which of the three models with k predictors has the smallest
           test RSS?
       (c) True or False:
              i. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by forward
                 stepwise are a subset of the predictors in the (k +1)-variable
                 model identified by forward stepwise selection.
             ii. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by back-
                 ward stepwise are a subset of the predictors in the (k + 1)-
                 variable model identified by backward stepwise selection.
                                                           6.6 Exercises     283

        iii. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by back-
             ward stepwise are a subset of the predictors in the (k + 1)-
             variable model identified by forward stepwise selection.
        iv. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by forward
             stepwise are a subset of the predictors in the (k +1)-variable
             model identified by backward stepwise selection.
         v. The predictors in the k-variable model identified by best
             subset are a subset of the predictors in the (k + 1)-variable
             model identified by best subset selection.

2. For parts (a) through (c), indicate which of i. through iv. is correct.
   Justify your answer.

    (a) The lasso, relative to least squares, is:
          i. More flexible and hence will give improved prediction ac-
             curacy when its increase in bias is less than its decrease in
             variance.
         ii. More flexible and hence will give improved prediction accu-
             racy when its increase in variance is less than its decrease
             in bias.
        iii. Less flexible and hence will give improved prediction accu-
             racy when its increase in bias is less than its decrease in
             variance.
        iv. Less flexible and hence will give improved prediction accu-
             racy when its increase in variance is less than its decrease
             in bias.
   (b) Repeat (a) for ridge regression relative to least squares.
    (c) Repeat (a) for non-linear methods relative to least squares.

3. Suppose we estimate the regression coeﬃcients in a linear regression
   model by minimizing
                ⎛                       ⎞2
          n
          0                  p
                             0                             p
                                                           0
                ⎝yi − β0 −         βj xij ⎠   subject to         |βj | ≤ s
          i=1                j=1                           j=1


   for a particular value of s. For parts (a) through (e), indicate which
   of i. through v. is correct. Justify your answer.

    (a) As we increase s from 0, the training RSS will:
          i. Increase initially, and then eventually start decreasing in an
             inverted U shape.
         ii. Decrease initially, and then eventually start increasing in a
             U shape.
284     6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

           iii. Steadily increase.
           iv. Steadily decrease.
            v. Remain constant.
      (b) Repeat (a) for test RSS.
       (c) Repeat (a) for variance.
      (d) Repeat (a) for (squared) bias.
       (e) Repeat (a) for the irreducible error.
  4. Suppose we estimate the regression coeﬃcients in a linear regression
     model by minimizing
                           ⎛                       ⎞2
                     n
                     0                  p
                                        0                    p
                                                             0
                           ⎝yi − β0 −         βj xij ⎠ + λ         βj2
                     i=1                j=1                  j=1


      for a particular value of λ. For parts (a) through (e), indicate which
      of i. through v. is correct. Justify your answer.

       (a) As we increase λ from 0, the training RSS will:
             i. Increase initially, and then eventually start decreasing in an
                inverted U shape.
            ii. Decrease initially, and then eventually start increasing in a
                U shape.
           iii. Steadily increase.
           iv. Steadily decrease.
            v. Remain constant.
      (b) Repeat (a) for test RSS.
       (c) Repeat (a) for variance.
      (d) Repeat (a) for (squared) bias.
       (e) Repeat (a) for the irreducible error.

  5. It is well-known that ridge regression tends to give similar coeﬃcient
     values to correlated variables, whereas the lasso may give quite dif-
     ferent coeﬃcient values to correlated variables. We will now explore
     this property in a very simple setting.
      Suppose that n = 2, p = 2, x11 = x12 , x21 = x22 . Furthermore,
      suppose that y1 + y2 = 0 and x11 + x21 = 0 and x12 + x22 = 0, so that
      the estimate for the intercept in a least squares, ridge regression, or
      lasso model is zero: β̂0 = 0.
       (a) Write out the ridge regression optimization problem in this set-
           ting.
                                                          6.6 Exercises    285

      (b) Argue that in this setting, the ridge coeﬃcient estimates satisfy
          β̂1 = β̂2 .
      (c) Write out the lasso optimization problem in this setting.
      (d) Argue that in this setting, the lasso coeﬃcients β̂1 and β̂2 are
          not unique—in other words, there are many possible solutions
          to the optimization problem in (c). Describe these solutions.

  6. We will now explore (6.12) and (6.13) further.

      (a) Consider (6.12) with p = 1. For some choice of y1 and λ > 0,
          plot (6.12) as a function of β1 . Your plot should confirm that
          (6.12) is solved by (6.14).
      (b) Consider (6.13) with p = 1. For some choice of y1 and λ > 0,
          plot (6.13) as a function of β1 . Your plot should confirm that
          (6.13) is solved by (6.15).

  7. We will now derive the Bayesian connection to the lasso and ridge
     regression discussed in Section 6.2.2.
                                  )p
      (a) Suppose that yi = β0 + j=1 xij βj +ϵi where ϵ1 , . . . , ϵn are inde-
          pendent and identically distributed from a N (0, σ 2 ) distribution.
          Write out the likelihood for the data.
      (b) Assume the following prior for β: β1 , . . . , βp are independent
          and identically distributed according to a double-exponential
          distribution with mean 0 and common scale parameter b: i.e.
                    1
          p(β) = 2b   exp(−|β|/b). Write out the posterior for β in this
          setting.
      (c) Argue that the lasso estimate is the mode for β under this pos-
          terior distribution.
      (d) Now assume the following prior for β: β1 , . . . , βp are independent
          and identically distributed according to a normal distribution
          with mean zero and variance c. Write out the posterior for β in
          this setting.
      (e) Argue that the ridge regression estimate is both the mode and
          the mean for β under this posterior distribution.


Applied
  8. In this exercise, we will generate simulated data, and will then use
     this data to perform best subset selection.

      (a) Use the rnorm() function to generate a predictor X of length
          n = 100, as well as a noise vector ϵ of length n = 100.
286    6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

      (b) Generate a response vector Y of length n = 100 according to
          the model
                         Y = β0 + β1 X + β2 X 2 + β3 X 3 + ϵ,
          where β0 , β1 , β2 , and β3 are constants of your choice.
      (c) Use the regsubsets() function to perform best subset selection
          in order to choose the best model containing the predictors
          X, X 2 , . . . , X 10 . What is the best model obtained according to
          Cp , BIC, and adjusted R2 ? Show some plots to provide evidence
          for your answer, and report the coeﬃcients of the best model ob-
          tained. Note you will need to use the data.frame() function to
          create a single data set containing both X and Y .
      (d) Repeat (c), using forward stepwise selection and also using back-
          wards stepwise selection. How does your answer compare to the
          results in (c)?
      (e) Now fit a lasso model to the simulated data, again using X, X 2 ,
          . . . , X 10 as predictors. Use cross-validation to select the optimal
          value of λ. Create plots of the cross-validation error as a function
          of λ. Report the resulting coeﬃcient estimates, and discuss the
          results obtained.
      (f) Now generate a response vector Y according to the model
                                  Y = β0 + β7 X 7 + ϵ,
          and perform best subset selection and the lasso. Discuss the
          results obtained.
  9. In this exercise, we will predict the number of applications received
     using the other variables in the College data set.
      (a) Split the data set into a training set and a test set.
      (b) Fit a linear model using least squares on the training set, and
          report the test error obtained.
      (c) Fit a ridge regression model on the training set, with λ chosen
          by cross-validation. Report the test error obtained.
      (d) Fit a lasso model on the training set, with λ chosen by cross-
          validation. Report the test error obtained, along with the num-
          ber of non-zero coeﬃcient estimates.
      (e) Fit a PCR model on the training set, with M chosen by cross-
          validation. Report the test error obtained, along with the value
          of M selected by cross-validation.
      (f) Fit a PLS model on the training set, with M chosen by cross-
          validation. Report the test error obtained, along with the value
          of M selected by cross-validation.
                                                        6.6 Exercises    287

     (g) Comment on the results obtained. How accurately can we pre-
         dict the number of college applications received? Is there much
         diﬀerence among the test errors resulting from these five ap-
         proaches?

10. We have seen that as the number of features used in a model increases,
    the training error will necessarily decrease, but the test error may not.
    We will now explore this in a simulated data set.

     (a) Generate a data set with p = 20 features, n = 1,000 observa-
         tions, and an associated quantitative response vector generated
         according to the model

                                    Y = Xβ + ϵ,

         where β has some elements that are exactly equal to zero.
     (b) Split your data set into a training set containing 100 observations
         and a test set containing 900 observations.
     (c) Perform best subset selection on the training set, and plot the
         training set MSE associated with the best model of each size.
     (d) Plot the test set MSE associated with the best model of each
         size.
     (e) For which model size does the test set MSE take on its minimum
         value? Comment on your results. If it takes on its minimum value
         for a model containing only an intercept or a model containing
         all of the features, then play around with the way that you are
         generating the data in (a) until you come up with a scenario in
         which the test set MSE is minimized for an intermediate model
         size.
     (f) How does the model at which the test set MSE is minimized
         compare to the true model used to generate the data? Comment
         on the coeﬃcient values.
                                  G)
                                     p           r 2
     (g) Create a plot displaying    j=1 (βj − β̂j ) for a range of values
         of r, where β̂jr is the jth coeﬃcient estimate for the best model
         containing r coeﬃcients. Comment on what you observe. How
         does this compare to the test MSE plot from (d)?

11. We will now try to predict per capita crime rate in the Boston data
    set.

     (a) Try out some of the regression methods explored in this chapter,
         such as best subset selection, the lasso, ridge regression, and
         PCR. Present and discuss results for the approaches that you
         consider.
288    6. Linear Model Selection and Regularization

      (b) Propose a model (or set of models) that seem to perform well on
          this data set, and justify your answer. Make sure that you are
          evaluating model performance using validation set error, cross-
          validation, or some other reasonable alternative, as opposed to
          using training error.
      (c) Does your chosen model involve all of the features in the data
          set? Why or why not?
7
Moving Beyond Linearity




So far in this book, we have mostly focused on linear models. Linear models
are relatively simple to describe and implement, and have advantages over
other approaches in terms of interpretation and inference. However, stan-
dard linear regression can have significant limitations in terms of predic-
tive power. This is because the linearity assumption is almost always an
approximation, and sometimes a poor one. In Chapter 6 we see that we can
improve upon least squares using ridge regression, the lasso, principal com-
ponents regression, and other techniques. In that setting, the improvement
is obtained by reducing the complexity of the linear model, and hence the
variance of the estimates. But we are still using a linear model, which can
only be improved so far! In this chapter we relax the linearity assumption
while still attempting to maintain as much interpretability as possible. We
do this by examining very simple extensions of linear models like polyno-
mial regression and step functions, as well as more sophisticated approaches
such as splines, local regression, and generalized additive models.

    • Polynomial regression extends the linear model by adding extra pre-
      dictors, obtained by raising each of the original predictors to a power.
      For example, a cubic regression uses three variables, X, X 2 , and X 3 ,
      as predictors. This approach provides a simple way to provide a non-
      linear fit to data.

    • Step functions cut the range of a variable into K distinct regions in
      order to produce a qualitative variable. This has the eﬀect of fitting
      a piecewise constant function.

© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 2021                      289
G. James et al., An Introduction to Statistical Learning, Springer Texts in Statistics,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-1418-1_7
