From al-Mabda' wa'l-Ma'ad. Okay. The Fourth Suradiq is finished. Thirty-fourth Suradiq. Yes, Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. Yes, the Fourth Suradiq from the book al-Anwar. It gathers five abwab. The first bab among them gathers five fusul. The first fasl among them is the Fourteenth Suradiq from the book al-Anwar, which gathers five abwab. And the bab al-awwal among them gathers five fusul, and the first fasl among them... Narjaʿu ilā siyāqihi al-qawl min ḥaythu intahā min al-qawl (We return to the flow of the discourse from where the discourse ended) by the Qa'im. And that is, when he, upon whom be remembrance and peace, appears, wa-waqaʿa al-ḥisāb wa-istaqbala bi-ahli al-ʿiqāb wa'l-ʿadhāb (and the reckoning occurs, and he confronts the people of punishment and torment) fa-ḍāʿafa al-thawāb ahli al-thawāb (then the reward for the people of reward will be multiplied.) Now we return towards the discourse... Kalam (discourse). Siyaqah means of making the discourse flow. The meaning of 'saqa' is to make something move. Siyaqah means making the qawl (discourse) flow. Ilā siyāqat al-maṣdar (towards the flowing of the source/infinitive). Maṣdar (infinitive) means to make it flow. Chalana (to make flow). What is a maṣdar (infinitive)? That in which the Urdu "na" comes. Khana (eating), peena (drinking), chalana (making flow). Siyaqah. Towards the flowing of the qawl (discourse)... to the flowing of the qawl from where we had ended it, our qawl... in the state of the Qa'im. In the state of the Qa'im, 'alayhi al-salam. And that is the matter... that is the matter, that he, when... when you appear... when you appear... when idhā comes, the meaning becomes that of the mudari' (imperfect tense). Iḍā ẓahara. Ẓahara is madi (perfect tense), but when idhā comes, it becomes mudari'. When lam comes, it is mudari' but the meaning becomes that of the madi. When you appear, upon you be zikr and salam, and the hisab (reckoning) will occur. And hisab will occur. Then, the ahl-e 'iqab (people of punishment) will receive 'adhab (torment). No. ...wa-istaqbala bi-ahli al-ʿiqāb wa'l-ʿadhāb (...and he confronts the people of punishment and torment). And they will meet the ahl-e 'iqab with torment. They will turn their attention to. They will turn their attention with the ahl-e 'iqab towards the 'adhab. And the thawab (reward) will be more for the ahl-e thawab (people of reward). Then... then... Fa (then)... then, more will be... then the thawab will be more for the ahl-e thawab. Who are these ahl-e 'iqab? The bad people who will be the azdad (opposites). When they are made to reach the 'adhab, made to reach saqar (hellfire). That will happen. So it won't just be that, but rather, the ahl-e thawab, those who have done good deeds, their thawab will increase. Their thawab will be multiplied. Fa-qāma al-daʿwah ilā an yastakhrija minhā man yakūnu maqāmuhu fī iqāmat al-daʿwah wa-takhallafa fī man fī ḍimnihi ilā rutbat al-ʿaql al-ʿāshir (So he established the da'wah so that he may extract from it one whose station will be in establishing the da'wah, and he will succeed among those within his fold to the rank of the Tenth Intellect, al-'aql al-'ashir). Al-'aql al-'ashir. ʿaqlan tāmman kāmil an nūrāniyyan aḥad al-ʿuqūl al-ibdā'iyyah (a perfect, complete, luminous intellect, one of the Primordial Intellects). And he will establish the da'wah... so that one will emerge from your da'wah... He will establish the da'wah. And he will establish the da'wah, so that from his da'wah will emerge... yastakhrija minhā (he will extract from it). He will extract from it... he will extract from his da'wah one who will establish his maqam (station)... in the iqamat al-da'wah (establishment of the da'wah). So they will be transferred. They will be transferred... they will pass away... bi-man fī ḍimnihi (with those in his fold)... with those in his fold... to the rutbat al-aql al-'ashir (rank of the Tenth Intellect). Whatever is in the 'aql al-'ashir. Your 'aql al-'ashir is... that is, the rank above you has ten maratib (levels). Those ten maratib... with them is the jussa-i ibda'iyyah (Primordial Corporeality). 'aql al-'ashir means jussa-i ibda'iyyah? Jussa-i ibda'iyyah. So its point is the most exalted. The jussa-i ibda'iyyah, its exaltation... the jussa-i ibda'iyyah that is there, a seat will remain with them. This is a principle that no person can be promoted until their successor is born. Now, what kind of successor should it be? A juzwi (partial) successor... promotion doesn't happen from a juzwi successor. This is the principle. The successor must be kulli (universal). Then their promotion happens. Now there is the jussa-i ibda'iyyah. The Imam's qiyam (rising) happened. So what happened? Can the Imam go and become the deputy of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah? No. They are juzwi. The Qa'im 'alayhi al-salat wa al-salam is a successor of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah, a juzwi one. Who will be its successor, of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah? One like the jussa-i ibda'iyyah. `Lā yukhlifu aḥadun illā mithluhu` (No one succeeds except one like him). This is its... no one succeeds universally as a khalifah except a person like him. When the jussa-i ibda'iyyah comes, then its khalifah... however many... in the dawr (cycle) of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah, how many qawrs are there? Four... four lakh. A qawr has 400,000 dawrs. Each dawr is 400,000 years. However many individuals there are, all of them will go and stay in its ufuq (horizon). All of them will be juzwi. Who will be the kulli? Such a jussa-i ibda'iyyah. When it appears, it will go and become its successor in a kulli manner, and that jussa-i ibda'iyyah will be exalted. This same thing is established at every level. There is an Imam. Who is the Imam's khalifah? The second Imam. The seventh Imam came, his rank was exalted. Who will be the khalifah of that seventh Imam? A seventh Imam just like him. He is the khalifah kulli. The smaller Imams, those of a lesser rank, a one-rank Imam, they cannot become its khalifah kulli. They will be khalifahs, but in a juzwi manner. They cannot be kulli. And Sayyidna Sadiq would say to Sayyidna Jumali, "Where you say 'juzwi', the meaning should be 'kulli'. And where you say 'kulli', there 'juzwi' should be kept in mind." That is, juzwi is also with it. Like... ʿaqlan tāmman kāmil an nūrāniyyan (a perfect, complete, luminous intellect). In the likeness of a perfect, complete intellect, which is complete and luminous. Aḥad al-ʿuqūl al-ibdā'iyyah (one of the Primordial Intellects). Like one of the ʿuqūl ibdā'iyyah. Wa-saʿada al-ʿaql al-ʿāshir ilā rutbat al-ʿaql al-tāsiʿ (And the Tenth Intellect ascended to the rank of the Ninth Intellect). And the 'aql 'ashir will ascend to the... the ninth intellect. It is being explained here that the first jussa-i ibda'iyyah is... 'alam al-arwah (the world of spirits). The first one that appeared... that is being explained. So the jussa-i ibda'iyyah will be promoted. The first... the most excellent one will go and take the place of the 'aql 'ashir. You are talking about your final dawr? The final dawr. Or the first, the first mawt (death) that occurred. The first mawt. Wa-saʿada (and it ascended)... and the 'aql 'ashir will ascend towards the 'aql tasi'. As it has preceded in the discourse... Wa-ṣāra hādhā al-qā'im fī rutbat al-ʿaql al-ʿāshir mudabbir al-jamīʿ ʿālam al-ṭabīʿah jirmānihā wa-jismānihā (And this Qa'im came to be in the rank of the Tenth Intellect, the administrator of the entire world of nature, its celestial and terrestrial aspects). And this Qa'im will become, in the rank of the 'aql 'ashir, the administrator for the entire 'alam al-tabi'ah (world of nature), whether jirmānī (celestial) or jismānī (terrestrial). Ilā an yastakhliṣa qā'iman yaqūmu fī maqāmihi (Until he appoints a Qa'im who will stand in his station). Until they find a pure Qa'im... who will stand in his station. They will make a khalifah Qa'im. They will make him pure. Wa-intaqala huwa ilā rutbat al-ʿaql al-tāsiʿ (And he himself will be transferred to the rank of the Ninth Intellect). And that 'ashir, which is... will be transferred to the rank of the 'aql tasi'. Wa-ʿalā hādhā al-manhā intaqala dā'iman (And in this manner, he will be transferred perpetually). And this... and this quality will continue to be, always. It will continue to be transferred, always. Fa-idhā intaqala al-qā'im ʿalayhi al-zikr al-salām bi-man fī ḍimnihi (So when the Qa'im, upon whom be remembrance and peace, is transferred with those in his fold)... He said, 'aql 'ashir, 'aql tasi'. The ninth will take the place of the eighth. The eighth, the seventh. The seventh... where will it go? To the sixth. The sixth to the fifth's place. The fifth to the fourth's place. The fourth to the third's place. The third... to the second's. The second... it will remain in the second. The second, what will happen? It will remain there. The second, which is... its circle is specific. Who is the second? Munba'ith awwal (the First Emanation). What is above it? The circle of 'aql awwal (the First Intellect). There... the circle of wahdat (unity). No one can reach there. Whatever is there, the light is of the second. Munba'ith awwal. It will be exalted in its kamal-e thani (second perfection). Its kamal-e thani will be vast. Yes. Its... but no person can reach the circle of the 'aql awwal. It is the circle of wahdat. It is explained here. And when the Qa'im is transferred, upon him be zikr and salam, there, that... that person in his fold, as preceded in the discourse... Wa-qāma waladuhu al-mustakhraj min daʿwatihi (And his son, who was extracted from his da'wah, will rise). So they will establish your son, who... who you will extract. The one being extracted from your da'wah. From your da'wah. Fa-qāma bi-amr al-daʿwat al-hādiyah (So he will undertake the affair of the guiding da'wah). So he will establish your son... the amr (affair) from the da'wat... from the da'wat al-hadiyah. ...ilā an (until)... until they extract... ilā an yastakhrija man yaqūmu maqāmahu (until he extracts one who will stand in his station). ...one who will stand in his station. Wa-yūfī mā ʿalayhi min al-khidmah (and he will fulfill the service that is upon him). And he will fulfill what is upon him of the khidmah. And he will fulfill what is upon him of the khidmah. Wa-intaqala ilā ufuq abīhi (and he will be transferred to the horizon of his father). And the son... this son... his father's... to the ufuq (horizon) of his father... will be transferred. Wa-lā yazāl al-daʿwah qā'imatan jāriyatan (and the da'wah will not cease to be established and flowing). And similarly, the da'wah... will remain established and flowing. ...will remain established and flowing. Wa-kullu maqām yantaqilu ilā ufuq al-ʿāshir ʿalā al-ʿādat al-ma'lūfah (And every station is transferred to the horizon of the Tenth upon the customary habit). Ilā tamām al-muddah (until the completion of the period). Ilā tamām al-muddah wa-inqiḍā' al-ʿiddah (until the completion of the period and the end of the term). Wa-hiya sabʿat ālāf sinīn (And it is 7,000 years). And every maqam (station) which... which itself is transferred to the ufuq of the 'ashir... on the 'adat (custom)... on the custom that... that is ma'lūfah (customary)... the 'adat qadīmah (ancient custom). The 'adat that has been appointed. ...ilā tamām al-muddah (until the completion of the period). ...until the period is completed. ...wa-inqiḍā' al-ʿiddah (and the end of the term). ...until the completion of the count. And that is 7,000 years. Wa-qāma qā'imun fa-yaṣīru ʿindahu jamīʿ hādhihi al-maqāmāt al-ṣā'irah (And a Qa'im will rise, and with him will be all these stations that have come to be)... fī ufuq al-ʿāshir (in the horizon of the Tenth). ...fī ufuq al-ʿāshir. And a Qa'im will stand... and with him will be these stations which are arriving... arriving in the 'aql 'ashir. They will arrive with him. These 7,000 years they are talking about, so... the 7,000 years, the period they have mentioned. At all times, until... This is about the Qa'im. There, in the dawr-e kashf, it's 10,000 years. Where the dawr-e kashf is mentioned, you should understand. The manifestation of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah happened. After the jussa-i ibda'iyyah, who came? Your son came. The son did da'wah. The son passed away. When the son passed away, where will they reach? In the ufuq of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah. There, a point is established. In the ufuq of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah, in its court, one of their seats is established. Until 10,000 years pass in the dawr-e kashf. In the dawr-e satr, it's 7,000 years. That is also mentioned. In the dawr-e kashf, 10,000 years passed. So every... every Imam, Qa'im, after 10,000 years, they will go and obtain their seat. When 10,000 years are over, then a Qa'im of those 10,000 years will manifest. After 10,000 years, one Qa'im will manifest. What will that Qa'im do? When he reaches the ufuq, then the jussa-i ibda'iyyah will put the forms of the Imams of those 10,000 years under his authority. Under whose authority? That Qa'im of 10,000 years. Then the second 10,000 years came, then the third, it will be the same. So the first Qa'im of 10,000 years, what is he doing? He is preparing his future Qa'im of 10,000 years to become his successor. And what will he do? He will obtain all the forms from that future Qa'im of 10,000 years. They are in the ufuq of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah. And until the Qa'im who will manifest after 50,000 years, what will that Qa'im do? He won't just gather the Imams, but rather... the qawa'im... all the five qawa'im, he will gather them. And a great... his... he will become a qā'im kullī (universal Qa'im). This is mentioned in the 50,000 years of the dawr-e kashf. This method is explained. After that, the manifestation of the dawr-e satr will happen. In the dawr-e satr, the Qa'im who will manifest will not just gather the Imams of his dawr, but what will happen? When his rank increases, in the dawr-e satr, when his Qa'im increases, then what will happen? He will also gather the Qa'im of the dawr-e kashf. In the satr. The Qa'im of the dawr-e satr, who is... he will gather the Qa'im of the dawr-e kashf. How? In the ufuq of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah. From there, things will be obtained for him. And after that, this is the matter of one dawr-e kashf and dawr-e satr. Now after this, seven dawr-e kashf and seven dawr-e satr will happen. So in reality, who is the successor of the Qa'im of the dawr-e satr? The one who will be the second Qa'im of the dawr-e satr. He is the true successor. Until seven come. Seven dawr-e kashf, seven dawr-e satr happened. Then a qā'im kullī of a qā'im kullī will come. What will he do? He won't gather just the Imams. He won't gather just the qawa'im. But rather, he will gather the qawa'im of the seven dawr-e satr. And under the qawa'im of the dawr-e satr, what is there? The Qa'im of the dawr-e kashf is also there. They are under them. So his rank will go from where to where. But under whom? Under the jussa-i ibda'iyyah. Ufuq... the word ufuq is used for that. That a kursi (throne) is appointed. The kursi will remain. The throne will be appointed. Now after that, until this continues to happen, a qawr will end, a new jussa-i ibda'iyyah will come. So when the new jussa-i ibda'iyyah comes, when it gets promoted, it will take the place of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah that was there before, and it will be exalted. And this will become its successor. In this way, it is explained. The gathering which is... the mudabbir al-amr (administrator of the affair) will... the bodies of the people of the dawr-e satr and their fudala'... then... the mudabbir will turn his attention... the mudabbir will turn his attention to the amr... to the amr... of raising the bodies... the one who administers the amr will be addressed... the one who administers the amr... ba'th (resurrection) to the bodies of the people of the dawr-e satr... ba'th to... when the dawr-e kashf begins, then the bodies of the people of the dawr-e satr... the resurrection of their bodies will happen, ba'th will happen. Innal-ba'tha haqq (Indeed, the resurrection is true). And their fudala' (excellent ones)... upon finishing... upon the finishing of the dawr-e satr. So the dawr-e kashf... the dawr-e satr, upon its finishing... Fa-awwalu mā ukhidha bihi ajsām ahl al-dawr al-muhammadī (So the first thing to be taken will be the bodies of the people of the Muhammadan dawr)... li-qurbatihim min dawr al-qā'im ʿalayhi al-zikr al-salām (due to their nearness to the dawr of the Qa'im, upon whom be remembrance and peace)... wa-sharafihim wa-kawnihim kānū fī dawr al-satr ākhiran (and their nobility, and their being in the dawr of satr at the end). Ākhiran. Ākhiran. So the first thing that will begin... with it are the bodies of the people of the dawr Muhammadī... due to their qurbat (nearness)... to the dawr-e Qa'im... from the Qa'im, 'alayhi al-zikr al-salam... and due to their sharafat (nobility)... and their being... in the dawr-e satr at the end... at the end. Fa-yubʿathu ajsām hā'ulā' al-awliyā' (So the bodies of these awliya' will be resurrected). Wa-alladhīna irtaqat nufūsuhum ilā ʿālam al-ṣafā' wa-takhammarat ajsāmuhum al-sharīfah wa-takhammarat shay'an ba'da shay'in (and those whose souls ascended to the world of purity, and their noble bodies fermented, and fermented bit by bit). And... so the ba'th will happen... so the ba'th of the ajsam (bodies) of the awliya' will happen... and such people whose nufus (souls) had ascended... to the 'alam al-safa'... and their noble bodies had fermented... and takhmir... Takhmir and takhmin, we'll have to see the difference. What is it? That they received takhmin (estimation). Khammara means they remained hidden. Kamana means to be hidden. They were hidden, a little after a little. A little after a little. Thumma ajsām sā'ir... then the ajsam of all... The 1000-year process is that... sā'ir al-firaq. Then the ajsam of all the firaq (sects). And their nufus... Allatī istaḥālat fī ajsāmihim (which transformed in their bodies). Such that they transformed... such that they transformed in their bodies. It's being explained... the azdad are being explained. And the bodies also, both. That is, the azdad, the bodies of the azdad. Wa-udhīqū al-ʿadhāb al-adnā dūna al-akbar (And they will be made to taste the lesser punishment, not the greater). And they will taste that... all of them, the 'adhab adna (lesser punishment). Thumma ajsām sā'ir qurubihim min dawr al-qā'im ʿalayhi al-zikr al-salām. They will begin with the ajsam of the people of the dawr Muhammadī, from the dawr al-qa'im. The mention of 'after' is not there. Akhiran... The 'a' of 'akhir' has a jamat. Akhir... before the zuhur of the Qa'im. Thumma ajsām sā'ir al-firaq. Then the ajsam of all the firaq. This is about the dawr-e satr. The dawr-e satr, the final dawr. Thumma ajsām sā'ir al-firaq. Then the ajsam of all the firaq and their nufus. Allatī istaḥālat fī ajsāmihim (which transformed in their bodies). ...that they had transformed in their bodies. The previous ones... awwalu mā yabda'u bihi ajsām... such that their bodies transformed. The azdad. The previous sects, what happened? The awliya' are those who love. The mu'minin. And after that, their azdad, their bodies. What was in the bodies of the azdad? Their nufus had transformed in their bodies. Wa-udhīqū (and they were made to taste)... and they were made to taste... the 'adhab adna... siwā al-akbar (except the greater). Fa-yaqūmu dawruhum sabʿat ālāf sinīn (And their dawr will be established for 7,000 years). So... their dawr is established for 7,000 years. Thumma qāma qā'imuhum wa-istaqbala baʿth ahl dawr ʿĪsā ʿalayhi al-salām (Then their Qa'im will rise and will face the resurrection of the people of the dawr of 'Isa, peace be upon him). This seems to be in continuation. Wa-yaqūmu dawruhum sabʿat ālāf sinīn. My understanding is that what was explained before... that... the first year... dawr-e satr... no... the dawr-e Muhammadi is over. And after that, what they have mentioned, they have mentioned the dawr-e kashf. Read it and understand. Fa-yaqūmu dawruhum sabʿat ālāf sinīn. This is the dawr-e Muhammadi. Yes. It's not the dawr-e Muhammadi. It is the dawr... that of the first Qa'im. It is said the dawr-e satr is over. Wa-inqiḍā' al-ʿiddah wa-hiya sabʿat ālāf sinīn (and the end of the term, which is 7,000 years). The 7,000 years are finished. Now the dawr-e kashf will begin. It is about the dawr-e kashf that is being mentioned. The dawr-e satr, it is finished. The dawr-e Muhammadi is finished. The dawr-e satr is not finished. The 7,000 years are finished. Dawruhum sabʿat ālāf sinīn. So their dawr is established for 7,000 years. So their dawr is established for 7,000 years. So this would be the dawr-e kashf. In dawr-e kashf, it's established. The first 7,000. The first 7,000 years that are mentioned are finished. How are they finished? They will be finished in the dawr-e kashf. Majazi kashf has already begun. Only the Qa'im is awaited. Then he will openly declare the kashf. So in that respect... we are in the dawr-e Qa'im, not the dawr-e Muhammadi. And there is a repetition of the fudala'. Wa-yaqūmu dawruhum sabʿat ālāf sinīn. This dawr, plus the 7,000 years that were previously of the kashf, the qasur (deficiencies) are also included in this. The qasur are included. It's an explanation of the dawr-e kashf. Dawr-e kashf. Then... as it has been explained. Thumma ajsām sā'ir al-firaq wa-nufūsuhum. Its zuhur hasn't even happened. It is here. Read on. Fa-yaqūmu dawruhum sabʿat ālāf sinīn. So their dawr will be established for 7,000 years. Then their Qa'im will stand and will face the ba'th (resurrection) of the ahl al-dawr (people of the dawr) of 'Isa, 'alayhi al-salam. As has preceded. As has preceded in the discourse, until the 7,000 years are completed. And their Qa'im, 'alayhi al-salam, will stand. And he will face the ba'th of the ahl al-dawr of Musa, 'alayhi al-salam. And he will face the ba'th of the ahl al-dawr of Musa, 'alayhi al-salam, until 7,000 years are completed. And their Qa'im, 'alayhi al-salam, will stand. Then the ba'th of the ahl al-dawr of Ibrahim, 'alayhi al-salam, will be faced. Likewise, 7,000 years. And their Qa'im, 'alayhi al-salam, will stand. Then the ba'th of the ahl al-dawr of Nuh, 'alayhi al-salam, will be faced. Likewise, 7,000 years. Then their Qa'im, 'alayhi al-salam, will stand. And the ba'th of the ahl al-dawr of Adam, 'alayhi al-salam, will be faced. Likewise, 7,000 years. And their Qa'im will stand. The Qa'im will establish. Wa-tamma dawr al-kashf. Wa-qāma qā'imun, 'alayhi al-salam. Fa-tamma dawr al-kashf. And the dawr-e kashf will be completed. It's about the dawr-e kashf being mentioned. 7,000 for each, their bodies, their souls will be resurrected. Wa-tamma dawr al-kashf. And the dawr-e kashf was completed. Wa-akhadha bi-dawr al-satr ʿasharat ālāf sinīn (And it was followed by the dawr of satr for 10,000 years). And after it came the dawr-e satr, which is for 10,000 years. It is on this basis that it is imagined here that it is 10,000 years. In the dawr-e satr, it is 10,000 years. Whereas in many places in the dawr-e satr, it is 7,000. It seems the dawr-e kashf, the dawr-e fatrah (interim period) is also included. Wa-minhā thalāthat ālāf sinīn dawr ahl al-nujūm wa'l-falsafah wa-ʿilm al-riyāḍiyyah (And among them, 3,000 years is the dawr of the people of astronomy, philosophy, and the science of mathematics). And among them, in those 10,000 years, 3,000 years are such... which are the dawr of ahl al-nujum, falsafah, and 'ilm al-riyadiyyah. Wa-sabʿat ālāf sharīʿah (And 7,000 of Shari'ah). And 7,000 are years of Shari'ah. ʿAlā mā taqaddama bihi al-qawl (As the discourse has preceded). As the qawl has preceded it. Wa-lā yazāl al-ḥāl kadhālika dawr al-kashf wa-dawr al-satr wa'l-imām wa'l-imāmah mustamirratan jāriyatan ʿalā al-ʿādah fī tasalsul min wāḥid ilā wāḥid wa-mawlūdun bi-ʿaqab wālidin abadan sarmadan lā inqiṭāʿa lahā wa-lā ʿudūla bihā ʿan al-ʿaqab ʿalā mā huwa mashrūḥ fī mā taqaddama ilā wafāt qawr Ādam alladhī huwa thalāthumi'ah alf sinah wa-sittūn alf sinah maḍrūbun fī mithlihā (And the situation will not cease to be thus: the dawr of kashf and the dawr of satr, and the Imam and the Imamate will be continuous, flowing according to custom in a chain from one to another, and a child succeeding a parent, forever and ever, with no interruption and no deviation from the lineage, as has been explained in what has preceded, until the passing of the qawr of Adam, which is 360,000 years multiplied by its like). And the situation will always remain thus, in this dawr-e kashf and dawr-e satr, and the Imam and Imamah will remain established, flowing according to custom in a chain from one to another. Here it is thought that every 1000 years, the zuhur that happens... these bones will be of the 'izam, and the 'izam remain for a very long time. And the zuhur of the 'izam happens. I'll have to see. You've asked this question in the book. The answer has been given. And that situation will always remain thus, in the dawr-e kashf and dawr-e satr. And the Imamate is mustamirra (continuous), it keeps flowing. Flowing according to custom in a chain, from one to after one. And a mawlud (newborn) comes after a walid (parent), always and forever. There is no inqita' (break) for it, and no turning away from it, from the 'aqab (lineage). As has been explained in what has preceded, until the passing of the qawr of Adam, which they call the qawr of Adam. Who they call the 400,000 years... a qawr is called. Qawr asghar is what they call it, the dawr. The dawr is called qawr asghar. And when the full one comes, it's called qawr a'zam. That which is 360,000 years. Fa-idhā inqaḍā dhālika istarkhat rubāṭāt al-aflāk (So when that comes to an end, the tethers of the celestial spheres will loosen). Now this is the qiyamat-e kulli (universal resurrection). So when that time ends, istarkhat rubāṭāt al-aflāk (the tethers of the celestial spheres will loosen). Istarkha, they will become loose. The rubāṭāt of the aflāk will become loose. The rubāṭāt of the aflāk, meaning... the things that are holding them... Yes, the magnet that is there... the awṭād al-falak (pegs of the sphere), they will become loose. The pegs of the sphere... the spiritual ones that maintain the bonds... all the spheres... falak al-muhit (the encompassing sphere), falak... gravity, you could say. The gravitational forces will end. So all the spheres... Yes. Rubāṭāt al-aflāk. All the rubāṭāt of the aflāk. Wa-fanā jamīʿ mā ʿalā wajh al-arḍ (and everything on the face of the earth will perish). And it will perish... and everything will perish... that is on the face of the earth... on the face of the earth... from nabat (plants), hayawan (animals), and bashar (humans). Wa-ṣāra al-amr ka-awwalihi fa-yakūnu al-tadbīr li-zuḥal (And the affair will become as it was at first, and the administration will be for Zuhal/Saturn). And the amr will become... like the first... like the first, the first state there was, when there was nothing. No nabat, no hayawan, no insan. That will be the state. Fa-yakūnu al-tadbīr li-zuḥal (And the administration will be for Zuhal). The tadbir will be for Zuhal. The worlds of intellect? The worlds of intellect? No. The earth that is called, the dunya (world), what is in it? Nabat, hayawan, and bashar. All will perish. This is called the qiyamat-e kulli. So this is only a mention of the dunya? It's a mention of the dunya. So the loosening of the spheres, the spheres themselves will not be destroyed, but only the dunya will be destroyed? Yes. Rubāṭāt al-aflāk. The magnetism that is there, of its spheres, it will become loose. The qawr will be established. Fa-yakūnu al-tadbīr... after that, a new cycle will begin. Fa-yakūnu al-tadbīr li-zuḥal (And the administration will be for Zuhal). The tadbir will become for Zuhal. For Zuhal. Fa-yafnā jamīʿ mā ʿalā al-arḍ min jibāl wa-ḥijārah (And everything on the earth, from mountains and stones, will perish). And then he will cause to perish... he will cause to perish all that is... on the earth... from stones... from mountains, stones... jibāl (mountains), hijārah (stones). Fa-yaṣīru mudaddak (And it will become pulverized). So they will become... they will become... pise huwe (crushed). Crushed. Wa-yarṣidu al-bard al-mufriṭ (And an extreme cold will watch). Severe cold... and severe cold. Thumma al-salūj al-mutarākimah (Then the piled-up snows). Then... the ice, snow that is piled up on one another... piled up on one another. Wa'l-ghuyūm wa'l-ḍabāb (and clouds and fog)... and clouds and fog. Wa-ẓalām al-jawwī (and darkness of the atmosphere). And the darkness of the fiza' (atmosphere). Wa-taṣʿad al-bukhār wa-ghadrān al-amṭār (And vapor will rise, and pools of rain will form)... of the bukhar (vapor)... and the rising of the bukhar and the falling of rain. Rain will fall. Wa-tafajjur al-anhar (And the bursting forth of rivers). And the bursting of the chashmas (springs)... of the nehrs (rivers). ...ḥattā takūn al-arḍ jamīʿan ka'l-baḥr (until the entire earth becomes like the sea). Until the entire earth becomes a... a samandar (sea). Yastalib amwājuhā (Its waves will snatch). Its waves will become muttarib (turbulent). Wa-fī jamīʿ al-āfāq ẓulmah (And in all horizons, there will be darkness). And in all the afaq (horizons), darkness... darkness. Lā tanqaṭiʿ wa-lā tatajallā (It will not be cut off and will not be cleared). It will not be cut off... and it will not... it will not be removed... it will not be removed. ...li-kathāfat al-ghuyūm bayn al-shams wa'l-arḍ (due to the density of the clouds between the sun and the earth). Because of the density of the clouds... of the badals (clouds)... between the aftab and the zamin... between the aftab and the zamin. All changes are happening on the earth. The qiyamat is on the earth. Right. So first, everything will be covered with water. That is the first thing. And what is this, 'wa-lā tanjil... li-kathāfat al-ghuyūm bayn al-shams wa'l-arḍ'? I didn't understand. The light of the aftab will not be able to reach the earth. There will be so many ghuyum, so many asbab, due to the effect of Zuhal, that the light of the aftab will not be able to reach the earth. There will be complete darkness. Wa-yastamirru tadbīr al-kawākib (And the administration of the stars will continue). Who will feel the cold? There will be no humans. No one. Wa-yastamirru tadbīr al-kawākib ʿalā mā ḍakarnāhu (And the administration of the stars will continue as we have mentioned). And the tadbir of the kawakib will continue as we have just mentioned. Fa-idhā āna ẓuhūr qā'im al-alfiyyah min mughārāt kamā kāna awwalan saʿada min laṭā'if al-arḍ wa-aṣfā mā fīhā ḍay'un shay'un yakūnu khalīfatan li'l-shams wa-sā'ir al-kawākib wa'l-burūj (So when the time comes for the appearance of the Qa'im of the millennium from the caves, as it was at first, there will ascend from the subtle parts of the earth and the purest of what is in it, a light, something that will be a successor to the sun and the rest of the stars and constellations). And when the time of the zuhur comes... the zuhur of the Qa'im al-alfiyyah from the gharon (caves)... from the caves... as it happened before... they ascend... from the latā'if of the earth... the latā'if of the earth will ascend... from the latā'if of the earth... and the purest of... the purest of what is in it... what is in it... a light, a thing... a thing which will be a khalifah... for the aftab... for the aftab. Who is the khalifah for the aftab? These things from the Khana-e Ka'bah, they will ascend and take the place of the aftab. And things will fall from the aftab. And the things that will fall from the aftab, which have been prepared there, and after being prepared, from them, the... the jussa of this... all things will be made. The next jussa that is going to manifest. So how much of a gap is there between two qawrs? We don't know that. Between two qawrs... it is said that one... No, I mean, one qawr is ending, another qawr is beginning. So the life that begins in between them... one is the end, and one is the beginning. So the gap between them... The process of zuhur is the same. Khalīfatan li'l-shams (a successor to the sun). The things from the earth that will ascend will be the khalifah of the aftab. Things will descend from the aftab, and from them, the jussa-i ibda'iyyah will be nurtured. The new jussa-i ibda'iyyah that is manifesting, it will be nurtured from that. But first, the earth will have a chance to settle. It will take quite a long time for the earth to settle too. All the things that are ending in the Qawr A'zam... 51,000 years, right? 51,000 years for the stars to... one... So then all the plans that were there in the beginning... every 7,000 years, the planning that happens... Khalīfatan li'l-shams wa-sā'ir... Yakūnu khalīfatan li'l-shams. Meaning, this... Khana-e Ka'bah... The Khana-e Ka'bah's things will ascend to the top and will be... and from the shams, things will descend. And after descending, the jussa-i ibda'iyyah's... will become the successor. The things of the jussa-i ibda'iyyah, from them... Wa-sā'ir al-kawākib. All the kawakib... Khalīfatan li'l-shams wa-sā'ir al-kawākib wa'l-burūj (a successor to the sun and the rest of the stars and constellations). For the shams, for the sā'ir kawakib, and for the burūj. Wa-tanḥadiru al-shams (And the sun will descend). And the shams will fall. ...wa-kawākib al-sittah (and the six stars). ...and the six kawakib. ...wa'l-burūj al-ithnā ʿashar (and the twelve constellations). ...the twelve burūj. ...ilā al-arḍ (to the earth). ...towards the earth. Wa-yaʿūdūna turāban saḥīqan (And they will become fine dust). So they will become... they will become... mitti (dust)... barik mitti (fine dust). Wa-minhā yakūnu... from it... Falak ka bhi... What is this, tanhadiru al-shams, wa-kawākib al-sittah? And the falak al-burūj. Falak al-muhit is not there. The seven kawakib and burūj, the twelve burūj. These 19 things will descend to the earth. And they will become turab-e sahiq (fine dust). Wa-minhā yakūnu... and from it will be... There's no mention of the earth. I mean, whatever will fall, the spheres will fall on the earth. The earth will remain as it is. The earth in which... nabat, insan, hayawan... it will be Murtaza. It will be in water, right? The water... Namiat. No. It's not mentioned, the sakhr. Sakhr is in its own state. Sakhr is in its own condition. Now a new zuhur is happening, that the things that will descend from the sky, these things will be promoted upwards, and from the sky, things will descend. First, at the end of the qawr, things had gone up, right? Wa-minhā yakūnu... ...mawlīd Ahmed. Mawlīd qiyamat. Mawlīd is... Anwaar... Anwaar is also... Arwah are also there. The azdad are there. The azdad... at that time, it is called anwaar. The azdad have... anwaar... Wa-minhā yakūnu al-samāniyah wa'l-ʿishrūna shakhṣan fuḍalā' al-kuramā' wa-ashrafuhā fī al-jussat al-ibdā'iyyah wa-yakūnu al-shams hiya imāmuhum wa-ra'īsuhum wa-bāqī al-kawākib wa'l-burūj hum al-sabaʿat wa'l-ʿishrūna al-ẓāhirah bi-ẓuhūrihi wa-yakūnu al-ḥāl ʿalā mā kāna awwalan kadhālika (And from it will be the twenty-eight persons, the excellent, the noble, and the most honored of them in the primordial corporeality. And the sun will be their Imam and their chief, and the rest of the stars and constellations will be the twenty-seven who appear with his appearance. And the situation will be as it was at first). And from that earth... there will be twenty-eight individuals who are the shakhs-e fudala al-kurama', and the sharif people, in the jussa-i ibda'iyyah. And the shams will be their Imam. Sir, this... when the azdad come, the anwaar won't come? For the anwaar, the period is long? For Shaykh Mola 'Azam, the anwaar won't come? What?
