As-salamu alaykum. As-salamu alaykum. Wa alaikum as-salam. Wa alaikum as-salam, wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh. Wa alaikum as-salam. As-salamu alaykum, brothers. Wa alaikum as-salam. Shall I read the lesson? Yes.

Alright, from the 27th section, from its end, we will read.

A'udhu billahi minash shaitanir rajim. Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim, wa bihi nasta'in, wa sallallahu 'ala rasulihi sayyidina Muhammadin wa 'ala ali Muhammadin, wa barik wa sallim.

Thumma inna kulla da'in (Then every caller) amara ahla jaziratihi (commanded the people of his island) an yatazawwaja kulla wahidin minhum al-untha (that each one of them should marry the female). And then, every caller commanded the people of his island that they should marry, each one of them, with a female, with that woman, allati takawwanat fi magharatin (who was formed in a cave) other than his own. That she who has been born, who has taken form, besides his own, besides his own clod of earth. Wa yatazawwaja min ghayrihi (and he should marry from other than his own) unthahu (his female). And he should marry from other than his, with that woman, allati zaharat min magharatihi (who appeared from his cave). And she who, from his clod of earth, who has been born, min fudlati ma'ihi (from the leftover of his water), from his own leftover water, that is, from his remaining water, wa hiya lahu ka-'l-ukhti (and she is like a sister to him), she is his sister. La yahillu lahu nikahuha (marrying her is not lawful for him). And to marry her is not permissible. Hadhihi tariq al-haqq (This is the path of truth) al-tahira (the pure one). Alright, this has been done for us, al-munazzah (the exalted one). Yes.

Alhamdulillah. Alhamdulillah. Alhamdulillah. Alhamdulillah. Alhamdulillah. From al-hamdu lillah.

Yes. Fa-'l-hamdu lillahi 'l-ladhi hadana li-dhalika (So praise be to Allah who guided us to this). So for Allah is all praise, who guided us to this matter. Wa ma kunna li-nahtadiya lawla an hadana Allah (And we would not have been guided if Allah had not guided us). If His guidance were not there, we could never have found guidance. Wa kana hadhihi 'l-wilada min al-ardi tilka 'l-daf'ah al-wahidah al-uwwala la ghayr (And this birth from the earth was that one single first instance, and no other). And the matter of guidance, Allah Ta'ala Himself told the Rasulullah, who is the greatest guide, the most exalted, that you cannot guide anyone. You cannot guide anyone. Whatever is related to guidance is from Us. Meaning, the Rasulullah wanted people to become Muslims from among them in his own lifetime. He tried very hard for that, and Allah Ta'ala also praised this in the Qur'an-i Majeed. But Allah said this: that you cannot guide anyone. The Being who grants guidance is Our Being. Yes. So guidance is a great thing. And you see that inside it, what subtlety is there? That just as the beginning verses of the Qur'an-i Majeed, that Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. Alif. Lam. Mim. Dhalika 'l-kitabu la rayba fih (That is the Book, in which there is no doubt). That this is the book in which there is no doubt. Huda li-'l-muttaqin (a guidance for the God-fearing). It is guidance for the God-fearing. So the word huda is used. And the letters of ha, dal, ya—what is their numerical value? The letters that it has are 19. Ha has five. Ha has five. Dal has four. Five and four is nine. And ya has ten. So in this way, it becomes 19. And the Ahl al-Bayt al-Kiram, who they are, their letters are also 19. Muhammad has four. 'Ali has three, that's seven. Then Fatima has five, twelve. Then Hasan has three, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen. And Husayn has four. In this way, it becomes 19. Which is in correspondence with Bismillah. Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim also has 19 letters. So the blessings that are in Bismillah, meaning, it is said that the blessing that has come into the Qur'an-i Majeed, it has come due to the beginning with Bismillah. In one sense. Meaning, Allah started this word, this speech, His own speech, with Bismillah. Therefore, inside it, this is… it has been called blessed, this book. In the same way, the Rasulullah said that you should start every act with Bismillah, so that your every act will be blessed. And this… and look, in this Surah al-Fatiha also, the virtues it has, in it, the one which is Iyyaka na'budu wa iyyaka nasta'in (You alone we worship, and You alone we ask for help), right? And this is a phrase that is non-repeated. It has come only once in the Qur'an-i Majeed. And those that are non-repeated, great virtue is attached to them over the repeated ones. Just as in the muqatta'at. In the muqatta'at, there are many muqatta'at that are non-repeated. For example, Ya-Sin. It has come only once. Like Kaf-Ha-Ya-'Ayn-Sad. This muqatta' has come only once. In the same way, the muqatta'at that have been repeated, for example, Alif-Lam-Mim has come many times. Ha-Mim has come seven times. So in this way, the ones that are repeated are many. And the non-repeated ones are specific. And… so that non-repeated one has virtue over the repeated one. So Iyyaka na'budu wa iyyaka nasta'in, this is a non-repeated phrase. And if you count its letters too, they will be 19. Yes. In the same way, the most beloved prayer, which is in Surah al-Fatiha, is ihdina 's-sirat al-mustaqim (Guide us to the straight path). That we, we recite this verse 51 times daily: ihdina 's-sirat al-mustaqim. That, "Guide us to the straight path." Yes. So its letters are also 19. Yes. And this, ihdina 's-sirat al-mustaqim, so which path is the invitation towards the straight path? What is the straight path? Its mention has been made in Surah al-An'am. Sirat al-mustaqim. Alladhina an'amta 'alayhim (Those upon whom You have bestowed favor). Min al-nabiyyina wa 's-siddiqina wa 'sh-shuhada'i wa 's-salihin, wa hasuna ula'ika rafiqa (Of the prophets, the truthful, the martyrs, and the righteous, and excellent are those as companions). Dhalika 'l-fadlu min Allah, wa kafa bi-'llahi 'alima (That is the grace from Allah, and sufficient is Allah as Knower). So this, which path is the straight path? For which we are seeking guidance. It is the path of the prophets, and the truthful, and the martyrs, and the righteous. To this path, "Guide us." And upon whom you have bestowed favor, have bestowed blessings.

And this birth was from the earth, which was one single instance. And this birth happened only once. Al-uwwala (the first one), which happened in the beginning of the cycle, the births that happened from the earth, from the clods, they happened only once in the entire cycle. Yes. Now when births happen, they will happen in the next cycle. In the beginning of the next cycle. La ghayra (no other). It did not happen besides this. Wa raja'a min al-tanasul bayna 'l-rijali wa 'l-nisa' (and it returned to procreation between men and women). And then the births after that returned to procreation. That they happen through men and women. Ilal-an (until now). Until today, the births that are happening, they are happening because of the union between women and men. Thumma jarat al-da'wa ila an istakhraja tilka 'l-shakhs al-fadil waladahu 'l-karim (Then the mission continued until that virtuous person brought forth his noble son). The birth that happened from the clods, and it has been mentioned to us that one time a man was born and one time a woman was born. Yes. Is it also possible that many men were born, many women were born from a single clod? No, from one clod, only one man. One man. Because, understand that if one man was born and one girl was born, then they became brother and sister. Understand that if two men were born, then they became brother-brother. No, from one clod, from the clod, from one person, a virtuous person was born. And after that, his sister, who was there, was born from his leftover water. From one clod, many individuals were not born. Only two were. One woman and one man. One man, yes. And the woman who was born was his sister. The clods that were made on Sarandib, was there just one clod? No, on Sarandib there was only one clod. I mean, there were many clods there. 28 clods were made, no? 28 clods were made. And among them, the most excellent one was the one of the juz'i ibda'iya. Yes.

Thumma jarat al-da'wa ila an istakhraja tilka 'l-shakhs al-fadil (Then the mission continued until that virtuous person brought forth...). Then the mission continued, until that virtuous person extracted, meaning, appointed, his noble son, from this noble mission, he appointed his noble son, alladhi yakhlufuhu fi maqamihi (who would succeed him in his station), so that he would become the successor of his station. Meaning, the successor of the station of the juz'i ibda'iya. Min hududihi wa ahli da'watihi (from his ranks and the people of his mission). From his ranks and from the people of his mission, he chose him. Yes. Kama nubayyinu ba'du an ba'd ba'da haqiqat al-ibtida' (As we will explain, one after another, after the reality of the beginning). And we will explain this in detail later. And this is the reality of the beginning. Musarrihan fi ghayri ramzin wa-la ishara (Explicitly, without symbol or indication). We have explained this explicitly, without symbol and without indication. Meaning, we have not explained it in a roundabout way, but have clearly explained how the condition of the beginning was, how the condition of the ibda' was. Yes. How much time would have passed between the hudud? They would have come out of the clods, it would have been four years... some time would have passed, then they would have gotten married, then a child would have been born, no? Yes. So the duration is not written anywhere, for how many years their life was. It is not written. And this is... Amir al-Mu'minin, one time... Amir al-Mu'minin said one time that a believer should know four things. That where... where did he come from? And where will he go? And how did he come? And how will he go? You said. Where did he come from? Meaning, from the spiritual world, his coming happened here. Through... in the episode of... he was included, and then he came to the earth. Where did he come from? And how... where will he go? We have to go to the spiritual world, by becoming an intellect. So how will our going be? This is a big process. And how did he come? Meaning, how did his coming happen here? The entire subject of mabda'. And how will he go? This is the subject of ma'ad. That how will our return be? Through the A'imma, through the Qawa'im, until the final one, who will be the Qa'im, who is called the Sultan in the Qur'an-i Majeed. So through him, from here, he will depart. Yes. So this is a very special saying of Amir al-Mu'minin. That you should know these four things.

Fa-khudh ma ataytuka wa-kun min al-shakirin (So take what I have given you and be among the grateful). So take what I have given you. And be among the grateful servants. Li-mawalina 'ala ma an'amu bihi 'alayna (To our masters for the favor they have bestowed upon us). And be among the grateful servants of our masters who have bestowed favor upon us. And you should thank them. Aqamahum Allahu bi-'l-jaza' (May Allah establish them with the reward). May Allah Ta'ala give them, meaning our mawali, their full reward. Faslun fi haqiqat al-ma'ad (A chapter on the reality of the return). Now, this is about mabda'. The mention of mabda' ends here. Now, they are speaking about ma'ad. In what way is the return happening? Faslun fi haqiqat al-ma'ad. So what is the reality of ma'ad? About that. I'lam annahu idha istajaba 'l-mustajib 'ala yadi haddin min al-hudud (Know that when the respondent responds at the hands of one of the hudud). That when the mustajib, mustajib means the one who is ready for the covenant. Now, they have taken the 'ahd-i sharif. Until now, they are Muslims in the houses of believers. Muslims are children. But we cannot say about anyone that, well, are your Muslims okay? Or if a believer's child dies, we cannot say this either, that your child was a Muslim and he passed away. These are all things that cause heartache. So we... those Muslims who are... children in the houses of believers, they are potential believers. They become actual believers at the time when they take the 'ahd-i sharif. Yes. So when a believer accepts at the hands of one of the hudud, from among any of the hudud... as is the method... ittasala bi-nafsihi 'inda tilawati 'l-'ahd al-sharif al-karim 'alayh (he connects with his soul at the time of the recitation of the noble, sacred covenant upon him). So, a point of light connects with his soul at the time of the recitation of the noble 'ahd. idha khalusat niyyatuhu (if his intention is pure) li-haddihi (for his hadd), for his hadd, with whom he is taking the 'ahd-i sharif, wa li-sahib al-zamanihi (and for the Master of his Time), and for his Sahib al-Zaman, meaning the Imam of the time, his intention is pure towards him, alladhi yad'uhu ilayhi salawatullah 'alayh (to whom he calls him, peace of Allah be upon him). Yes. So as... who... he is calling towards him, salawatullah 'alayh. Nuqtatun min nur (a point of light). A point of light... that point of light connects with him, with his soul. Yakunu mujawiran li-nafsihi (It is a neighbor to his soul). That point of light remains in proximity to his soul. Meaning, it stays in its neighborhood. The point of light that he has received due to the blessings of the 'ahd-i sharif, that point of light is in proximity to his soul. The sensual soul that he has, it is in proximity to his sensual soul. Ghayra mumazajatin (not mixing with it)... musharraqa (illuminating it), mujawhira laha (making it radiant). And it does not mix with his soul, meaning it does not merge. Until death. Yes, until death. It does not merge. It is its opposite. And that, it illuminates. And it makes it radiant. Who? That point of light illuminates and makes it radiant. Whom? His sensual soul. It wants the sensual soul to also become luminous like me. And also accept my word. As much as it accepts, it becomes a part of the natiqa soul. And that which it does not accept, it remains within the sensual. Yes. Only one part of the point of light is received? A small part is received. When he comes to every cycle, he will get... from that same point of light... it cannot be received in its entirety. No. And that too is a part of the portions of his repentance. The repentance he did in the spiritual world, a portion of that repentance is given. Yes. It will not be received in its entirety... from there it will end. No. It doesn't have that much power inside it... it doesn't have that much power that it can take it in its entirety, can bear it.

Wa 'ttisaluha bihi min qibali haddihi 'l-'ali (And its connection with him is from the side of his high-ranking hadd). And from the side of his high-ranking hadd, its connection happens. Meaning, he does not receive it directly, but the high-ranking hadd becomes his intermediary. This is the importance of the high-ranking hadd. Wa 'aslu dhalika min al-maddah wa 'l-ta'id al-sari (And the origin of that is from the substance and the flowing support). And that original substance and support which has flowed, min man la tujasiru nahwahu 'l-khawatir (from the one towards whom thoughts do not dare to venture). From his side, from whose side? That towards whom our hearts cannot dare to venture. Meaning, the Mubdi'-i Ta'ala (the Exalted Originator). From the side of the Mubdi'-i Ta'ala, he has received this point of light. How grand is the condition that is obtained by the mustajib, when he has just entered the 'ahd-i sharif. Look at the status of the Mubdi'-i Ta'ala, and the mustajib, a believer who has just entered. So how great a nobility he is receiving from the side of the Mubdi'-i Ta'ala. Yes. Then... ila 'l-'aql al-awwal al-sabiq (to the First Preceding Intellect). And to the First Intellect, that substance and support is issued. Thumma minhu ila sa'ir al-'uqul al-ibda'iya (Then from it to all the other originating intellects). And all the originating intellects, to them, that support and substance is issued. Thumma ila 'l-'ashir (Then to the Tenth). The tenth, the tenth intellect's... he is the administrator of the world of nature. Who? The 'Ashir. Thumma ila kulli maqamin (Then to every station). Then that substance and support comes to every Imam of the station. Kulli maqamin karimin fi waqtihi (Every noble station in its time), who is the Maqam al-Karim in his time. Min natiqin aw wasiyyin aw imamin (From a Natiq, or a Wasi, or an Imam). So he is either a Natiq, or a Wasi, or an Imam. Yes. So it comes to them. Thumma ila hududihi al-a'la (Then to his higher hudud). Then it comes to his higher hudud. Al-a'la thumma (The higher, then...). Then after the higher hudud, then the one who is higher than him, to him. Ila man yalihi (To the one who follows him). Meaning, up to... the hudud who are under him, to them. Ila an yattasila ila 'l-mustajib (Until it connects to the respondent). Until it reaches the mustajib. Al-sadiq al-niyyah (the one with sincere intention), who is sincere in his intention. Wa 's-sahih al-tawiyyah (and sound in his nature), who in his nature and his actions is correct. Fa-qistuhu min dhalika (His portion from that). So his portion comes from there. 'Ala qadri istihqaqihi (According to the measure of his worthiness). According to his worthiness, that portion is given to him. Because those who take the 'ahd-i sharif have different intentions. The intentions they have, they will get things accordingly. Now he came and sat down, that, "Well, my father is sitting, I should also sit." So there are such people too. So they come and sit. And they think that we too have received our portion, we too have become honored. But there is a big difference inside them. The nuqta-i nur which is received in the 'ahd-i sharif, it is received directly, isn't it? No, there is no intermediary for it? No, all these are intermediaries. The intermediary... at that time, his hadd-i 'ali has not even been made. Where? His hadd-i 'ali will be made when the 'ahd-i sharif happens, no? No, I mean, after the 'ahd-i sharif he got it, right? He is getting the nuqta-i nur after the 'ahd-i sharif. Yes. So up to here, from the Mubdi'-i Ta'ala, through all these means, he gets the nuqta-i nur through his hadd-i 'ali. Yes.

And that too according to his worthiness. As much as his worthiness is, according to that. Fa-kullama zada (And whenever it increases)... and as much as he increases... al-mustajibu min a'mal al-khayr (the respondent, from the deeds of good). The respondent who does good deeds in his life, min iqamat al-a'mal al-shar'iya (from establishing the works of the shari'ah), that the works of the shari'ah, with their establishment, meaning the seven pillars, with their adherence, wa 'l-muwadhabah 'alayha (and being constant in them), and being fully constant in them, wa 'stifadat al-'ulum (and benefiting from the sciences) min al-hudud al-malakutiya (from the celestial hudud), and benefits from the sciences, that the celestial sciences, from them he is benefiting from the sciences. Wa imad dhalika 'l-nuqta 'ala 's-suni'a (And the support of that point is on the sunnah). And the entire foundation is on his sincerity of intention. Fi muwalat al-mawali (In loyalty to the mawali). The one he has... with his mawali, with his A'imma, with his awliya' Allah, the intention he has. Sidq al-niyyah (sincerity of intention). Wa sidq al-tawiyyah (and sincerity of nature), wa 'l-i'tiraf li-kulli haddin bi-fadlihi (and acknowledging every hadd for his virtue), his good nature, and acknowledging every hadd, recognizing their virtue in his station of wahdaniyat (oneness), that their station is the station of wahdaniyat. Fa-kullama jadda fi jami'i dhalika (And whenever he strives in all of that). As much as he strives and works hard in good deeds and in the establishment of the works of shari'ah, and in benefiting from the sciences, as much as his effort is, then that... man jadda wajada (he who strives, finds). As he has strived, he has found. So this... zaliya kaburat tilka 'l-nuqtah (that point of light grew larger). So inside that point, it starts to grow. The point of light that he had received from the 'ahd-i sharif. Wa-zada 'shraquha (and its illumination increased) wa diya'uha li-'l-nafs (and its radiance for the soul). And its illumination increases. And its radiance, for his soul. Wa tasfiyah (and purification) wa sayqal (and polishing). And his purification and his polishing, polishing means to polish, to make it shiny, to polish utensils, so... 'ala qadri ma yaktasibu min al-khayrat (according to the measure of what he earns of good deeds). According to the good deeds he earns. Takunu suratuhu tilka (His form will be like that). His form keeps getting better. Li-annaha a'malun saliha (Because they are righteous deeds). Because these are all righteous deeds. Kama qala Ta'ala: man 'amila salihan fa-li-nafsihi (As the Exalted said: Whoever does righteousness, it is for his own soul). The one who does a good deed, it is for his own soul. Wa man asa'a fa-'alayha (and whoever does evil, it is against it). And the one who does evil, it is against his own soul. Yes. Meaning, look, that man 'amila salihan fa-li-nafsihi, the one who does a good deed, the person, in his life, all the things that have been told, it is for his own soul. Meaning, for the progress of his own soul. Yes. And this also... look that the lowest illumination that happens, there are several types of illumination. So the lowest illumination that happens to a believer, is the illumination of his own point of light upon his sensual soul and his body. The very least illumination. But it is an illumination. The very least illumination that happens is that of the point of light upon his sensual soul. Yes. He feels it, no? No, he doesn't feel it. Because the beauty of the natiqa soul is that it is so secretive that it does not inform its closest neighbor, the sensual soul. Yes. The one we call conscience in English, that is there, I mean... he doesn't feel it... we feel the conscience. Yes.

Wa man asa'a fa-'alayha. In my book, in Mudalaliya, it was mentioned, right? That Sayyidna Muhammad bin Fawad al-Qusu, he had reached a very old age, but your eyesight was completely fine, and your jaws were completely fine, and your face was so radiant that it always remained luminous, and people used to feel the luminosity of your face. So it was asked, "What was the reason for this?" So they said that at the time of a believer's death, when only the last breath remains in him, meaning he is just about to die, at that time, he is told from the side of the divine power that if you want... his place in paradise is shown to him. At such a time. That this is your place in paradise. So he, upon seeing his place, feels extreme joy and happiness. And because of that, light spreads on his face, because of the joy. So that state, Sayyidna Muhammad bin Fawad had for his entire life. Which a believer gets at the time of his death, that state, Sayyidna Muhammad bin Fawad had it for his entire life, due to the services he rendered. And he rendered such magnificent services that no one could. The way you saved the Da'wah-i Hadiya. And for which you were called Ghadanfar. And you have great titles. And because of this, in your offspring, until the Day of Judgment, the posts of du'at have been established, illa ma sha' Allah. Who were not in your... only four du'at were such who are not from your offspring. Otherwise, all the du'at, even today's Da'i, the Caliph of the Da'i, all are from your offspring. From your lineage. So this state was obtained by Sayyidna Muhammad bin Fawad. Yes. And Sayyidna 'Ali bin Sulayman, look, how... how amazing a thing it is. Sayyidna 'Ali bin Sulayman, at that time, when this chain of du'at was not even established, but at that very time, he had said that the du'at will be from the lineage of Sayyidna Muhammad bin Fawad until Qiyamah. This is what Sayyidna 'Ali bin Sulayman had said. At that time. You can imagine how magnificent a thing it is. The latest Da'i, the current Da'i... when they had become Da'i... after the death of Sayyidna Ja'far, in 1150. So for about 35... 38 years you were the Da'i. So in that period, the actions you performed were strange and wonderful, your affairs. Yes. And the books you wrote, the books you wrote on haqa'iq, and the one which is Shu'a' al-Anwar, which is... they say this, that Shu'a' al-Anwar is not in haqa'iq, but in daqa'iq. You yourself have mentioned it. And it is a magnificent book. Which the du'at before him had not opened such subjects that you opened. Yes. And Anvar al-Shashaniya, which is your book, it is an extremely difficult and magnificent book. Yes.

And it happened once that you were holding a majlis, Sayyidna 'Ali bin Sulayman. So while holding the majlis, you suddenly stood up. You said, "Please come. You have bestowed a great favor. You have been gracious to me. And you have been gracious to our companions that you have graced my gathering." So this became a strange and wonderful state, right? So later, people asked you, "What was this matter?" So he said, "Sayyidna Sulayman bin Hasan and Sayyidna Muhammad bin Fawad had come." Because of which this was my state. So how many affairs happened with you. Yes. And how much certainty there was. One gentleman gave a feast, and he was... a walima was his, and in the walima, he had invited a few people. So from some other village, his in-laws were. So the father, he invited a few people from that village, his relatives were. So they came running to Sayyidna Ali. So he said, "I had invited a few people, but here the whole... the whole village has come. And I haven't cooked that much food. So I am very worried, what should I do?" So you said, "Go, lift that pot, lift the lid of the pot, and blow Sayyidna Sulayman's name into it. And say, 'Ya Sayyidna Sulayman, aghithni!' (O Sayyidna Sulayman, help me!)" So he did the same. And that... the entire village... the several hundred people who had come, they all ate their fill from that same food, and not only that, but food was left over as well. So this is the state that happens. With the kalam of the awliya' Allah, and the blessings of their kalam. Yes. It happened like this in the time of the Rasul too, no? Yes, in the time of the Rasul it happened. Their state is very high. This quality was created in the du'at, so what would be the quality of the Rasulullah?

One time, you... Sayyidna 'Ali bin Sulayman... someone gave a rupee to him. And one rupee had a great value in those days. In one rupee, a goat would come. Which you have also mentioned, that one... one rupee... a goat is coming for one rupee. Prices have increased so much that a goat has started coming for one rupee. Yes. So anyway, someone gave you one rupee as a gift. So you took it and kept it. Then he... later you started looking for it, under the pillow, looked around. That... you didn't find it. So in your mind, that thought remained that someone gave me a rupee as a gift, and where did I put it? So he remained in this thought. Then when it was night, your habit was that you would go and close the main gate yourself. So... you were in Dar al-Taseer, which was the house of Sayyidna Ja'far bin Sulayman. So he went down, and there were a few steps, he went down and closed the main gate and started climbing up. So you saw that there was some burden on your head. You felt a burden, felt a weight. So you put your hand on your head and saw that the rupee was present there. You can imagine that what a strange and wonderful thing happened. A sahib wrote your mojizaat, that how the mojizaat... you have... one time, it happened that of Rajab or some month, it was the first night. So you... what did you do? Before that, one... one night before that, in the afternoon or evening, some person came and he said that, "You should clothe me, I don't have any clothes." So you gave him one garment. Then you thought that tonight... at that time you were in Dar al-Taseer and you were in taqiyya. So tonight, it is the first night, people will come to meet me, so what will I wear? I don't have any proper clothes. People used to come the next morning to meet. So I don't have any proper clothes, so what will I do? In this thought, you fell asleep. While thinking this. So late at night, someone knocked on the door. And knocked. So then you went and opened the door, so your... the time is up.

The door was knocked on. You... someone knocked on the door. So you went and opened the door. And you saw a believing brother, and with him there was some luggage as well. So...

So he said, "Mawlana, you know that I am a merchant. And for the purpose of trade, I had gone across the sea. Whatever his portion was. So he had gone. And on the way, a storm came. And I was in such a state that I would have drowned. And my wealth would also have been lost. So at that time, I made a vow that when I reach the shore safely, I will present a bundle of 500 garments in your service." So he brought it. So he, the bundle, placed it in your house. And left. You thanked him. Then you saw that in it there were garments, robes and such. So then you... at that time you raised your hands. It is said that you raised your hands and said, "O Allah, be a witness that I was not miserly in giving. I, to whom I gave, I was not miserly in that. And you too did not show any lack in your grace. Meaning, I was not miserly in giving, and your grace is also matchless, that you were not miserly in giving, and your grace has increased." Yes. So these were the states that the awliya' Allah had. And of which... how many there must have been, of which the mention... some, some have been mentioned by their hudud. Otherwise, there must have been so many such states of the du'at, who are the awliya' Allah. Yes. A questioner came and he was bothering a lot, so you rebuked him and he died the next day. Yes, that one... it happened that... you reminded me. His state was this that Sayyidna 'Ali bin Sulayman used to sleep very little. And his routine was that... the hadd who wrote the book, he has mentioned the routine in it. That he would pray Maghrib, and after the Maghrib prayer, you would rest. For an hour and a half or two. He would rest for an hour and a half or two. And then after that, he would pray 'Isha. And then eat food. Then after eating, he would eat a light meal. And the whole night, you would stay awake. And you would write, you would read, and you would contemplate. Until the time of dawn came. After Fajr, you would not sleep. Until the time of Zuhr came. And you would be busy with all the affairs of the da'wah. And after Zuhr and 'Asr, you would not sleep until Maghrib. So whatever... sleep you would get would be for an hour, two hours. This was your state. And this was your state for your entire life. So in that two hours, two and a half hours that you would get, in that, it was that you had told your hajib, who used to take care of you, you had told him that at this time, don't wake me up. Whoever comes, don't wake me up. And tell them that I am sleeping, I am resting. So from the village, two people came. And they said that we want to meet Sayyidna. So he, the hajib, said that, "Look, this is his time to sleep. And he rests very little. And at this time, I have been told that I should not let him meet anyone. No one should come to meet me." But they were insistent on their point, that, "No, we have come from very far, we will only go after meeting." So in this conversation, Sayyidna's eyes opened. So he asked, "Who is it?" So he, the hajib, said that, "Mawlana, I tried to stop them a lot, but they are insistent on meeting you. And they... want to meet you." So he said, "Send them inside." So you were in a state of jalal. Sayyidna 'Ali bin Sulayman was in a state of jalal. So he said, "What is the matter? For what purpose have you come?" So one of them said that, "We want that we have come for du'a, that you should pray for us." So you said, "Should I pray for your death or for your life?" You said. So that one person, he said that, "I hold life dear. I do not want death." So he, after taking the du'a, left. There was another person. So you asked him, "If you... what do you want?" So he said, "Pray for my death." "If death has to come, and it comes through your du'a, then what could be better?" So you said, "Look, if you want me to pray for your death, then you will not be able to see the coming Friday." You said. "You will not be able to see the coming Friday." And the author of the book writes that this is exactly what happened, that he died before the coming Friday, on Wednesday. And we performed his funeral prayer. Yes. So these states were strange and wonderful states. He said, "I have invited a few people."

Allahumma salli 'ala Muhammadin wa Ali Muhammad.
