As-salamu 'alaykum. Wa 'alaykum as-salam. As-salamu 'alaykum. How are you? Are you well? As-salamu 'alaykum wa rahmatullahi wa barakatuh.

A'udhu billahi min al-shaytan al-rajim (I seek refuge in Allah from the accursed Satan). My dear ones, Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim (In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful). Wa bihi nasta'in wa salla-llahu 'ala rasulihi sayyidina Muhammadin wa 'ala alihi wa sallam (And in Him we seek help, and may the blessings and peace of Allah be upon His Messenger, our master Muhammad, and upon his family and his progeny).

Previously, we read from the Zakhira. Uh... Kunuz al-Hikmah. We read Kunuz al-Hikmah. And the second book we read was al-Mula'iyya, which was a risala (treatise), a small one. Now, the third book is Kitab al-Mabda' wa 'l-Ma'ad (The Book of the Origin and the Return) by Sayyidna Mu'ayyad, qaddasa-llahu ruhahu (may Allah sanctify his soul). This is related to the haqa'iq-i Tayyibi (Tayyibi esoteric truths), that... and this is the first book that was written on mabda' wa 'l-ma'ad. After this, many books were written on mabda' wa 'l-ma'ad, but this is the first book by Sayyidna Mu'ayyad, Hibatullah bin Musa Shirazi, who is one of our famous bab al-abwab (gate of gates). And... whose famous couplet is: law kuntu 'asartu fi 'asri muhammadan ma qassartu rutbata 's-salmani (If I had lived in the time of Muhammad, my rank would not have been less than that of Salman). If I were in the time of the Prophet, my rank would not have been less than Salman's. So, he is the one who said this.

Sayyidna Mu'ayyad. And he has 800 majalis (sermons), Sayyidna Mu'ayyad's, which you have written, and you have encompassed all 'ulum (sciences) in them.

He was a bab-i zahir (manifest gate).

Ji, ji (Yes, yes). He was bab-i batin (the esoteric gate), I believe.

His rank is very high. In the da'wah, that is, among our bab al-abwab who have passed, his rank is very high. The rank of Sayyidna Mu'ayyad.

Meaning, to the extent that you are bab al-du'at... The... who were abu 'd-du'at (the father of the du'at)... meaning, when the du'at... the a'immah (Imams) went into concealment, and their representation... the du'at took over the representation of the a'immah, then you... you were given the rank of abu 'd-du'at by Imam Mustansir. That you will lead the prayers of the du'at. So he was called abu 'd-du'at. And umm al-du'at, the mother of the du'at, is Arwa bint Ahmad. Meaning, Hurrat al-Malika.

Yes.

In your time, the a'immah were not in concealment, were they?

No, it was after that. The era of the manifest Imams ended very quickly. After that, your... you remained, and Sayyidna Zu'ayb bin Musa was appointed by you and Hurrat al-Malika as the first da'i.

And today, the du'a (prayer) we read, of the second, of the second... the prayer of the second day, it has a very special quality. The prayers of Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq that we read in the morning, they are short prayers. So in them, Mawlana Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq, in the 30 days of prayers you have, in none of them has he used a muqatta' (disjointed letter), except in the prayer of the second day. That, yes, the wasila (means of intercession) that has been taken is from a muqatta' which is ghayr-i mukarrar (non-repeating). It has come only once in the Quran Majid. And what is that? Kaf Ha Ya 'Ayn Sad. Bi-kafin kafayta (With Kaf, You sufficed). Meaning, with Kaf, You are sufficient. Meaning, the being of Allah. As He says, kafa bi-llahi 'alima (Allah suffices as All-Knowing). Allah knows everything, and He is sufficient. Wa bi-ha'in hadayta (and with Ha, You guided), meaning ihdina 's-sirat al-mustaqim (guide us to the straight path). Yes. And bi-ya'in yassarta (and with Ya, You made easy). And with Ya, you created ease. As it is, fa-inna ma'a 'l-'usri yusra, inna ma'a 'l-'usri yusra (For indeed, with hardship [will be] ease. Indeed, with hardship [will be] ease.). And after that, Ya... Kaf Ha Ya 'Ayn. With 'Ayn, 'afawta (You forgave). You forgave. So Allah Ta'ala completely says that inna-llaha yaghfiru 'dh-dhunuba jami'a (Indeed, Allah forgives all sins). Allah Ta'ala has the power to forgive all sins. And then what is after that? Sad. Bi-sadin sadaqta (with Sad, You spoke the truth). That you spoke the truth in the Quran Majid, and your word... you are asdaqu 'l-qa'ilin (the most truthful of speakers). The most truthful of speakers. And your Messenger is also the most truthful. That just now you... before the risalat (mission), those people who later became your great enemies, would call you al-Sadiq al-Amin (the truthful, the trustworthy). That you are truthful and you are absolutely trustworthy. And to the extent that you... when you gathered... when you were commanded that you should call your near relatives, and when the verse wa-andhir 'ashirataka 'l-aqrabin (And warn your nearest kindred) was revealed, you called all your relatives and said, "If I tell you that a large army is coming from behind this Faran mountain that will attack you, will you accept my word?" They said, "We will believe your word."

Although they have not seen the army. But they said that you are truthful and you have never, you have never told a lie. So at that time, you presented the proof, meaning you presented the hujjat (argument), and then after presenting the hujjat, you announced your nubuwwat (prophethood) and risalat (mission).

And after that, it is said... it is said in history that there are two important days in the history of Islam.

The first day is the yawm-i 'ashirat al-aqrabin (day of the nearest kindred), when you gathered your relatives and made the declaration of your mission. This is the first day. And what did you say at that time? That, is there anyone who will support me and aid me? So Janab Ali was ten years old at that time. You stood up and said, "Ya... Ya... Ya Rasulullah." You said, "Ya Rasulullah." So the first person to say "Ya Rasulullah" was Janab Ali. He said, "I will support you, at your every opportunity." So you made him sit down. In this way, you asked the gathering three times, but all of them were sitting as if there were birds on their heads. But Janab Ali stood up and said this. You even said that whoever supports me today will be my khalifa (successor), my wasi (legatee), and my janishin (heir).

When this matter was settled, then it is said that the younger brother, that is, Ali 'alayhi 's-salam, fulfilled his promise. The entire history shows how much he supported the Prophet at every moment. So it was also the responsibility of the elder brother to fulfill his promise. So you, on the Day of Ghadir, you declared that al-yawma akmaltu lakum dinakum wa-atmamtu 'alaykum ni'mati (This day I have perfected for you your religion and completed My favor upon you). You conveyed this message. And you declared, man kuntu mawlahu fa-hadha 'aliyyun mawlahu (Of whomsoever I am the master, Ali is his master).

So this book, al-Mabda' wa 'l-Ma'ad, is by Sayyidna Mu'ayyad. Al-Mu'ayyad was a laqab (title) given to you by Mawlana Mustansir, who is our 18th Imam. And his original name was Hibatullah. Hibatullah bin Musa. And your father was also a da'i. Hibatullah bin Musa bin Sulayman bin Adam al-Shirazi. Yes.

So he was from Shiraz, a resident of Iran.

Where did your residence used to be, Hazrat? Your residence was in Iran or in Makkah/Madinah?

No, later he came here. He had come to Misr (Egypt).

Where did the a'immah live at that time?

In Misr. They were in Misr. The da'wah was in Misr.

Kitab al-Mabda' wa 'l-Ma'ad by Sayyidna Mu'ayyad, qaddasa-llahu ruhahu. Bismillah. Now there is a small mention about Sayyidna Mu'ayyad, nubdhatun min sirati sayyidina 'l-mu'ayyad (A glimpse from the life of Sayyidna Mu'ayyad). Qala sayyiduna 'aliyyu bnu sayyidina sulayman 'alaqahu fi kitabihi mufarrij al-abwab (Sayyidna Ali bin Sayyidna Sulayman mentioned it in his book, Mufarrij al-Abwab). His famous book is Mufarrij al-Abwab (The Opener of the Gates), in which you have compiled the du'at (prayers) of Sayyidna Muhammad bin Fahd al-`Aqus`, the collection of prayers, it is a collection of prayers, collected in a very magnificent way. That they... the du'at of the Ahl al-Bayt, Rasulullah, Janab Ali, which are mustanad (authentic) du'at, you have compiled them in this Mufarrij al-Abwab. So... so in it you say that, wa-qala fa-kana sayyiduna mu'ayyadu 'd-din min waladi 'n-nabiyyi sulaymana bni dawuda 'alayhi 's-salam (He said: Sayyidna Mu'ayyad fi 'l-Din was from the progeny of the Prophet Sulayman son of Dawud, peace be upon him). That Sayyidna Mu'ayyad fi 'l-Din, he was from the progeny of the Prophet Sulayman bin Dawud 'alayhi 's-salam. And Sulayman bin Dawud has great eminence, whose mention is in the Quran Majid. And there are only two such prophets who went from mustawda' (temporary abode) to mustaqarr (permanent abode). Who are they? The first is Idris 'alayhi 's-salam. Idris 'alayhi 's-salam, about whom it is said that wa-rafa'nahu makanan 'aliyya (and We raised him to a high station). That we elevated his place and rank. The second is this Sulayman, the prophet.

Rasulullah was also one, right?

Yes. Rasulullah...

Rasulullah was also...

Yes, Rasulullah's status is different. Yes.

Wa-kana abahu wa-ajdaduhu du'ata a'immatin atharin min azman al-a'immat al-masturin al-thalatha (And his fathers and forefathers were du'at of the pure Imams from the time of the three concealed Imams). And your fathers and forefathers were du'at of the A'immah Athar (Pure Imams), from the time of the A'immat al-Masturin al-Thalatha (Three Concealed Imams). And your fathers... your parents were, and forefathers were, who are your grandfathers, they are from the du'at of the A'immah Athar, who were those Imams who were... the three masturin (concealed) Imams. The Imams of the three masturin... meaning after Sayyidna Muhammad bin Isma'il, when the Imams went into concealment, then three Imams were called masturin. Because after that, Mawlana Mahdi's appearance happened. So the appearance of Mahdi was completely public. So these three Imams with their muhtajibin (veiled ones) are the masturin. And who are those Imams? Ya'la, Ali, and Abu Talib Ali. Yes, these are the three. Who are muhtajibin. And their hujub (veils) are 'Abdullah, Ahmad, and Husayn. And in the time of Mawlana Ahmad, there was Ikhwan al-Safa... the Rasa'il of Ikhwan al-Safa.

Wa-kana huwa al-hujjata 'l-a'immat al-'uzma laday al-imam al-mustansir bi-llahi 'alayhi 's-salam (And he was the Hujjah of the great Imams for Imam al-Mustansir bi-llah, peace be upon him). And you were the hujjat al-'uzma. Before Imam Mustansir 'alayhi 's-salam. Wa-lahu insha'atun jammah fi 'z-zahir wa 'l-batin wa 'l-haqa'iq (And he has many compositions, in the exoteric, the esoteric, and the truths). And you have insha'at, meaning your compositions, which are many, which are in the zahir, in the batin, and in the haqa'iq. Wa-ntaqala fi 'l-'ashr al-awakhir min shahri shawwal al-karim sanata arba'a mi'ah wa sab'in hijriyyah (He passed away in the last ten days of the month of Shawwal in the year 470 Hijri). On the year 470 Hijri, when it was the month of Shawwal, he passed away in its last decade. Wa-qubira fi 'd-dari 'llati 'ntaqala fiha bi-dar al-'ilm bi 'l-qahirat al-mu'izziyyah bi-misr (And he was buried in the house where he passed away, in the Dar al-'Ilm in al-Qahira al-Mu'izziyya in Egypt). And you were buried, in that place, which is the Dar al-'Ilm. Meaning, the Qahira (Cairo) that is there, al-Mu'izziyya, in Misr (Egypt).

The ziyarat (visit) has not been made. Hasn't been done.

The ziyarat... Yes.

Of Sayyidna Mu'ayyad.

His ziyarat... ziyarat... inside it... uh... we went there, but perhaps we didn't go inside, to the Al-Azhar University. To its... to one of its sections, we went to the library section. Yes. Allah knows where his grave is.

Sayyidna Mu'ayyad had a maternal uncle, who... uh... wanted... that Sayyidna Mu'ayyad should not go into the presence of the Imam, because that uncle knew that he was very intelligent and was fond of knowledge. So he kept stopping him. And to the extent that for five years, he did not get a chance to go to the Imam. Yes. Then when he went to the Imam, then the Imam imparted his ma'rifat (gnosis) to him, and then he reached high ranks. To the extent that it is narrated that once you... once a... a... a letter from the Imam reached you, and it was said that you have to go to this place and perform jihad. So you wrote on the back of his letter that if Mu'ayyad's hands are cut off, you will not find another Mu'ayyad.

He wrote this and signed it. So actually, it was his uncle's machination. Yes. Yes. So this was his status, Sayyidna Mu'ayyad's.

And his du'as too, you see in the Sahifah, his continuous du'as are present. He has a large Sahifah, Sayyidna Mu'ayyad's, of du'as.

Was it him about whom... the ones who were around your Imam, the enemies who were hostile to you, they sent him to war? Was that the incident?

Yes, yes.

And... and this... Sayyidna Mu'ayyad's du'as, haqa'iq have been written on them by Sayyidna Muhammad bin Isma'il ibn Muhammad. Isma'il ibn Muhammad, who is the Da'i Shumukh. And he is a very high-ranking da'i, and his books are the highest books of the da'wah. Like Mansak, Mansak al-Hajj is his book, Sayyidna Isma'il Muhammad's. And Kitab al-Subuh. So in Kitab al-Subuh are the haqa'iq of his books. Yes. So I remember that Sayyidna Husayn bin Hasan used to come and Sayyidna 'Abdullah ibn Muhammad would be in i'tikaf. He would be sitting in the mosque. Because he used to live in the mosque. So Sayyidna Husayn bin Hasan would come to the mosque and sit in a place. And then he would go and sit with Sayyidna 'Abdullah ibn Muhammad. And Sayyidna sahib's... Sayyidna Husayn bin Hasan's uncle was there, who was the son of Sayyidna 'Abdullah. His uncle, Sayyidna 'Abdullah who was the da'i ghayr al-munfarid (non-solitary da'i). His son... anyway, so he would go and sit with Sayyidna sahib in the lesson. So only Sayyidna 'Abdullah ibn Muhammad would be there and his uncle would be there, Sayyidna sahib's. He would not stop his uncle. So once I had asked, Sayyidna sahib, Sayyidna 'Abdullah Muhammad, "Which book do you read with Sayyidna sahib?" So he looked at me with some thought. "What kind of question are you asking?" Meaning I am asking beyond my capacity. So then he finally gave the answer, that "I am reading Kitab al-Subuh." The haqa'iq of Sayyidna Mu'ayyad. Yes.

Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. Al-hamdu lillahi rabbi 'l-'alamin, wa 's-salatu 'ala rasulihi sayyidina muhammadin khatami 'n-nabiyyin, wa 'ala wasiyyihi 'aliyyi bni abi talibin ashrafi 'l-wasiyyin, wa 'ala al-a'immati min dhurriyyatihim at-tayyibin at-tahirin (All praise is for Allah, Lord of the worlds, and blessings be upon His Messenger, our master Muhammad, the seal of the prophets, and upon his legatee, Ali ibn Abi Talib, the noblest of legatees, and upon the Imams from their progeny, the pure and the purified). All praise is for Allah, who is the Lord of the worlds. And may blessings be upon His Messenger, who is Sayyidna Muhammad, the seal of the prophets, and upon his legatee, who is Ali ibn Abi Talib, who is the noblest among legatees, and upon the Imams from their progeny, the pure and the purified. Now look, al-hamdu lillahi rabbi 'l-'alamin. Allah, what does He say? All praises are for Allah, rabbu 'l-'alamin (Lord of the worlds). Who is the Lord of the worlds. Now, the thing upon which Allah has prided Himself and which He has mentioned in the first verse is that He has said rabbu 'l-'alamin. Whereas Allah Ta'ala could have said that He is khaliqu 'l-'alamin (creator of the worlds). That He is the creator of the worlds. So what is the thing that is higher than the rank of creation? That is the nurturing, the tarbiyat (upbringing). Tarbiyat. Tarbiyat is higher than the rank of creation. Therefore, Allah Ta'ala has described Himself with the highest rank, that He is rabbu 'l-'alamin. That He is indeed the creator of the worlds, but He also nurtures them, He is their Lord. Therefore, in our society, the importance of parents is not because they gave birth to us, but because they are responsible for our upbringing. Yes.

And then there is also this, that for whichever world... Allah Ta'ala has said for the Messenger that he is rahmatan li 'l-'alamin (a mercy to the worlds). For whichever world Allah Ta'ala is the Lord, you will have to believe that for that world, the Prophet 'alayhi 's-salat wa 's-salam, he is... nurturing? ...no, for that world, you are a mercy. For whichever world Allah Ta'ala is the Lord, for that world you have become a mercy. So how great is this eminence?

And then, what is the status of the Messenger? That he has said that sayara-llahu a'malakum wa-rasuluhu (Allah will see your deeds, and His Messenger). That soon, Allah will see your deeds, and His Messenger. Meaning, Allah who is wahdahu la sharika lahu (One, with no partner), He has given such eminence to the Messenger that He has made him a partner with Himself. That the deeds of the Muslim ummah and of the disbelievers and polytheists, all their deeds, Allah Ta'ala will see and will decide, and His Messenger. Yes.

And then, Allah says that He is the knower of the unseen. 'Alim al-ghaybi wa 'sh-shahadah (Knower of the unseen and the witnessed). Allah has called Himself this. But what did He say? In Surah... Surah Jinn, that... la yuzhiru... 'ala ghaybihi ahada illa man irtada min rasulin (He does not disclose His unseen to anyone, except to a messenger whom He has chosen). That He does not make His unseen manifest to anyone. Meaning He does not make anyone a knower of the unseen, except that messenger with whom He is pleased. And the mention of being pleased is in the Quran Majid, in Surah al-Duha. That... what did He say? Yes? fa-tarda (and you will be satisfied). Yes, fa-tarda. Allah will give you so much that you will be happy and pleased.

So you will see that the Quran Majid is like a qasidah (ode) in praise of the Messenger. From beginning to end, it is the mention of the Messenger.

A moment ago, it was mentioned that... about Kaf Ha Ya 'Ayn Sad... Janab Zaynab was teaching its haqa'iq to women. There is no mention of Janab Zaynab's rank, whereas Imam Hasan and Imam Husayn's ranks are mentioned. Is her rank... her rank is also high, right?

Yes, I mean... I haven't read about it, but there is a mention, that Sayyidna Sulayman bin Hasan, Sayyidna Wawaam, in the next raj'at (return), the rank he will get will be that he will manifest as Mawlatuna Zaynab. Sayyidna Sulayman bin Hasan.

aba'u mawlana al-imam ibni 'l-imam at-tayyib ab al-qasim amir al-mu'minin. i'lam ayyuha 'l-akh as-sa'id al-muwaffaq ar-rashid, anara-llahu basiratak wa-akhlisa li-wilayati mawalik sariratak. innahu wasala kitabuka ittasalta bi 'l-fawzi fi 'l-ma'ad, asbabuka tas'alu... O brother, who is pious, who has been granted success, and who is rightly guided, may Allah illuminate your insight and make your heart sincere for the wilayat (guardianship) of your masters. That your book, meaning the question you asked, has reached me, in which you have connected with success in the hereafter... the reasons... you ask... an khilafa'ida bima tanalu bihi... wa-hiya munqalibuka 'l-ajfa... that I should benefit you so that you may reach your place of return, meaning your hereafter, with success and felicity. Thus, I have fully answered your question, about what I know of your worthiness, that you are completely attached to the rope of wilayat for the rightly guided Imams, and your attachment and your fulfillment of the obligations upon you, from the religious duties, and your being organized in the ranks of those who act upon the religious commands, the mujtahidin (those who strive). And what I will explain to you in this book of mine is from the secret of the spiritual malakut (kingdom), which is connected through revelation with every rank, the spiritual ranks. And from there to the hudud (ranks) of the sincere ones, who are entrusted with the treasury of secrets, who are responsible for... the responsibility is to take the creatures out of the storm of atoms. The sincere ones... the question... no, no, the question hasn't started yet... The sincere ones, and he is the secret of the souls and the elixir for them. Meaning it will illuminate the souls and make them like gold. Such that the color of Allah will be cast upon it, the good color. As it is in the Quran Majid, Sibghata-llah wa-man ahsanu mina-llahi sibghah (The religion of Allah. And who is better than Allah in [ordaining] religion?). The color of Allah, and whose color is better than Allah's? Yes. The good... and it will make it... the pure... pure... and it will make it pure, after the sensual state has ended. And this is that your... the state you were in, the sensual soul, which was animalistic, then these sciences of the da'wah, which come from the hudud of the da'wah and from the Imam's gaze to the hudud of the da'wah, these things will make your sensual state, which is animalistic, into a speaking, angelic one (`natiqah-yi malakiyyah`). Fa-sunhu 'an kulli wahid... illa man dhakartu laka... yasunuka-llah. So you must protect it from everyone, except those I have mentioned to you. And Allah will protect you. Wa-hfazhu yahfazuka bihi bi-llah (And protect it, and Allah will protect you through it). And you protect it, and Allah will protect you through it. Wa-ana akhidhun 'alayka 'ahda-llahi 'l-mas'ul. And I am taking from you a covenant of Allah, about which you will be questioned. Wa 'l-mu'akkad. And which is confirmed. Wa-'ala man adhintu laka... 'alayhi 'an-llahi 'l-mas'ul al-mu'akkad. Such a covenant that you will be questioned about and which is confirmed. Wa-illa fa-anta wa-man yuqifu 'alayhi bari'un minhum ajma'in (Otherwise, you and whoever is informed of it will be free from them all). Otherwise, you and whoever is informed of it will be free from them all. Meaning from the Imams and the hudud of the da'wah, you will be absolved. Yes. Wa 'l-mu'akkad wa-mithaquhu mughalladh. This covenant of Allah is confirmed, and its pact is very strict. Wa-mushaddad, and severe. Alladhi akhadhahu 'ala al-mala'ikat al-muqarrabin. Which Allah Ta'ala took from His close angels. Wa-anbiya'ihi 'l-mursalin. And His sent prophets. Wa-a'immat ad-dinin al-hadin. And the guiding Imams of the religion. Wa-hududihim ar-rashidin. And their rightly guided hudud. Salawatu-llahi 'alayhim ajma'in (May the blessings of Allah be upon them all). Yes. And this 'ahd sharif (noble covenant) which is being talked about, about taking it from the angels, its mention is in the Quran Majid. That Allah took a bay'at (oath of allegiance) and a covenant, and in it, He first took the name of the Messenger. That we take your covenant. Then he took Adam's, then Nuh's, then Ibrahim's, Musa's, and 'Isa's. Yes.

Allah nasakhta... aminan harfan, wa-la aqalla wa-la akthara (You shall not copy it... not a single letter, neither less nor more). And it is binding on you that you do not naskh (copy) it, meaning my discourse, you should not take notes of it. Do not put it in writing. Not a single letter, neither less nor more. Wa-la waqafta 'alayhi illa anta. And no one should be informed of it except you. Meaning only you are permitted to know it. Au man adhintu lahu... bi 'l-wuquf... adhintu lahu bi 'l-wuqufi 'alayha (or the one whom I have permitted... to be informed of it). Or the one whom I have commanded and given permission to be informed of it. Wa-innaka tu'idu ilayya hadhihi 'n-nuskha ba'da an tafrugha min qira'atiha (And you will return this manuscript to me after you have finished reading it). And you will return this manuscript to me after you have completely finished reading it. Wa-llahu 'ala ma naqulu wakil (And Allah is a witness over what we say). And Allah Ta'ala is a witness over what we say. So you will do this. I'lam anna ghayb al-ghuyub alladhi la tajassaru nahwahu 'l-khawatir (Know that the Unseen of the Unseen, towards which thoughts dare not venture). That the Unseen of the Unseen, towards which our thoughts dare not venture, la yudraku bi-'add az-zamir (cannot be comprehended by the effort of the mind), and it cannot be comprehended by the effort of the mind, and it cannot be confined within the mind, that Unseen of the Unseen. Wa-la bi-iha'ati 't-tafkir (And neither by encompassing it through thought). And neither by encompassing it through thought and reflection can its reality be known. Wa-la yaqa'u 'alayhi ismun wa-la sifah wa-la sabil ila idrakihi bi 'l-iqrar (And neither can a name fall upon it, nor an attribute. And there is no way to comprehend it through confession). And neither can a name fall upon it, nor an attribute. And there is no way to comprehend it through confession. Bi-anna li-jami' al-'awalim mubdi'an abda'aha (That for all the worlds, there is an Originator who originated them). That for all the worlds, there is an Originator who created it. Ta'juzu 'l-'uqul 'an idrakihi (All intellects are powerless to comprehend Him). All intellects are powerless to comprehend Him. Wa-'lam anna 't-tawhid huwa ma'rifat al-hudud al-'aliyah wa 'd-daniyah (And know that tawhid is the gnosis of the higher and lower hudud). And know that tawhid (monotheism) is the ma'rifat (gnosis) of the higher hudud and the lower hudud. Meaning, the ma'rifat of the Exalted Originator is not possible. The ma'rifat of the Exalted Originator is not possible. So, as Sayyidna Ja'far bin Sulayman says, that... at-tawhid la-hum... no... at-tawhid laysa li 'l-ma'bud wa-lakin at-tawhid ma'rifat al-hudud (Tawhid is not for the Worshipped One, but tawhid is the gnosis of the hudud). That the ma'rifat of the Worshipped One is not tawhid, but the ma'rifat of the hudud is tawhid. Yes. The higher hudud and the lower hudud. And who has become the asman (heaven) of whom, and whose zamin (earth) has one become? Who is 'ali (higher) and who is dani (lower)? Yes. So its ma'rifat... as it is said, ma'rifat na kuni, zindiqi (If you do not have gnosis, it is heresy). If there is no ma'rifat, then that is kufr (disbelief). Yes.

Wa-'lam anna 't-tawhid huwa ma'rifat al-hudud al-'aliyah wa 'd-daniyah (Know that tawhid is the gnosis of the higher and lower hudud). Wa 'l-i'tiraf (And confession). And this is why Sani's rank fell from Munba'ith. He acknowledged Allah, meaning he confessed the Exalted Originator, that the Exalted Originator created everything. He did not do anything wrong there. And then he even had ma'rifat of 'Aql al-Awwal (the First Intellect). He had ma'rifat of the rank of 'Aql al-Awwal, and his... but where he lacked ma'rifat was of Munba'ith al-Awwal. And he... he said this: "I and Munba'ith al-Awwal are sawa sawa (equal). And in rank, we are one and the same." So that... due to not having that ma'rifat, his rank fell. Yes.

Hadrat Ibrahim sahib was also there...

Yes.

Wa 'l-i'tiraf anna kulla haddin minhum wahidun fi rutbatihi (And confess that every hadd among them is unique in his rank). And know this, that every hadd among them is unique in his rank. La yusharikuhu fiha siwahu (And in that rank, no one else is his partner). And in that rank, no one else is his partner. This is tawhid. Meaning, every hadd is unique. Yes. La ilaha illa-llah (There is no god but Allah). There is no object of worship, meaning no ilah, no object of worship, except Allah. There is no ilah except Allah. Meaning, among the intellects of the spiritual world, none is worthy of the word "Allah" being applied to them, except 'Aql al-Awwal. They are all at the rank of ilah. The hudud, the intellects of the spiritual world, are at the rank of ilah. And at the rank of Allah is only 'Aql al-Awwal. As in our time, the lower hudud and the higher hudud, whether they are mansus 'alayh (designated) or ghayr-i mansus 'alayh (non-designated), all of them are at the rank of ilah. And at the rank of Allah is the Imam of the time. La ilaha illa-llah. Yes.

And this kalimah, which is `la ilaha illa huwa`, is higher than `la ilaha illa-llah`. Yes. Because the Mubda' al-Awwal, meaning 'Aql al-Awwal, the confession he made of the Mubdi', what was it? Shahida-llahu annahu la ilaha illa huwa (Allah witnesses that there is no deity except Him). That Allah confessed this, that there is no object of worship except Him. Yes. So there, there, He used the word `huwa` (He). Al-huwiyyat al-muta'aliyah (The Transcendent Ipseity). He... his... meaning, he confessed. Gnosis is not possible, but he confessed. And then Rasulullah did not make that his kalimah. He did not make `la ilaha illa huwa` his kalimah, but rather he propagated `la ilaha illa-llah` and made it his kalimah.

And the numerical value of `la ilaha illa huwa` is 110. If its value is calculated from the science of jumal, the value of `la ilaha illa huwa` is 110. So... as it is in Surah Muzzammil: `rabbu 'l-mashriqi wa 'l-maghribi la ilaha illa huwa fa-ttakhidhhu wakila` (Lord of the East and the West, there is no god but Him, so take Him as a representative). That He is the Lord of the East and the West. Meaning, from where it begins to rise. If we look at this dawr (cycle), then from where it begins to rise, meaning Hasan. The Imams rose from Hasan. And where does it set? With Abu 'l-Qasim. So, `rabbu 'l-mashriqi wa 'l-maghribi`. Meaning, all of them are going to be organized in the being of Ali. So, `rabbu 'l-mashriqi wa 'l-maghribi la ilaha illa huwa`, meaning Ali. Fa-ttakhidhhu wakila (so take Him as a representative). The Messenger is commanded to take him as a wakil (representative). Make him your wasi (legatee). Yes.

That is also `rabbu 'l-mashriqayni wa-rabbu 'l-maghribayni` (Lord of the two Easts and Lord of the two Wests).

Yes, from there, emerging from Mawlana Ali and ending with him.

Yes.

So when a single one came, then a dual came, then `mashariq wa magharib` (easts and wests) also came. So that is...

The Amir al-Mu'minin himself explained this, in the zahir (exoteric) sense. Yes. In the exoteric sense, how did he explain it? That in a year, there comes a time when the sun rises from the same point it rose from. And it sets at the same point it sets at.

And the famous book, which is... which is... what is its name? `Saluni qabla an tafqiduni` (Ask me before you lose me), the answer is given in it. Mawla-i Ka'inat was asked this question. That Allah Ta'ala has said `rabbu 'l-mashriqi wa 'l-maghribi` in one place, `rabbu 'l-mashriqayni wa-rabbu 'l-maghribayni` in another, and `rabbu 'l-mashariqi wa 'l-magharib` in a third. What does this mean? So he said, "Look, when it rises and sets, it happens from a single point. Such a time also comes in a year." The second is that its beginning and end have been taken. Meaning, from where it is rising, and from where it is setting. The name of that state is `rabbu 'l-mashriqayni wa-rabbu 'l-maghribayni`. And `rabbu 'l-mashariqi wa 'l-magharib` means it rises from different places and sets. Meaning, its rising point is not one, nor is its setting point. Yes. Yes. And its haqa'iq have also been explained by one of our elders, what is meant by `rabbu 'l-mashriqayn` and `maghribayn`.

And `tajrid` (abstraction) is what? That `huwa salb al-ilahiyyah 'an jami' al-mubdi'at wa 'l-makhluqat wa-ithbatuha li-mubdi'ihim` (it is the stripping of divinity from all originated and created things, and affirming it for their Originator). That the attribute of divinity (`ilahiyyat`), meaning bringing forth from `nis` (non-existence) to `hast` (existence), from `na the` (were not) to creating existence from there... this attribute, to `salb` (strip) it, to snatch it from all created things, from all creatures. That this power is not in anyone, to bring forth from non-existence to existence, to bring into being where there was nothing. This power and strength is not in anyone. So, and to affirm it, that this attribute of divinity, if it exists, it is in their Originator.

And `tanzih` (transcendence). And `tanzih` means `huwa nafy jami' as-sifat 'an ghayb al-ghuyub` (it is the negation of all attributes from the Unseen of the Unseen). To negate all attributes from the Unseen of the Unseen. That He is knowing, manifest, hidden, creator... all these attributes, the beautiful names of Allah, to negate them from Him. This reality is not in the Originator. The Exalted Originator created the bearers of these realities. Yes. So that... to deny all attributes from the Unseen of the Unseen, meaning the Exalted Originator. To deny it. `i'tirafan lahu bi-anna jami' ash-sharaf wa 'l-jalalah` (confessing for Him that all nobility and majesty). To confess for Him that all nobility and majesty... and attributes, whatever attributes of nobility and majesty there are, and what is expressed in all languages through signs, with the definitions of divinity, `fa-innaha waqi'atun 'ala al-'aql al-awwal` (they all fall upon the First Intellect). All these realities and nobility and majesty apply to the First Intellect. As I will explain to you later... later on, its reality will be explained. `fa-hadhihi haqiqat at-tawhid wa 't-tajrid wa 't-tanzih` (So this is the reality of tawhid, tajrid, and tanzih). So this is the reality of `tawhid`, `tajrid`, and `tanzih`. `wa-zuddatu ma ja'a 'an mawalik salawatu-llahi 'alayhim fi 't-tawhid` (And this is the essence of what has come from our masters, blessings of Allah be upon them, regarding tawhid). And this is the essence of what has come from our masters, 'ala dhikrihi 's-salam (upon his mention be peace), regarding `tawhid`.

`faslun fi ibda' ar-ruhaniyyin` (A chapter on the origination of the spiritual beings). A chapter on the origination of the spiritual beings. Meaning... uh... the mention of the origination of the spiritual beings is happening here. That... meaning, what I mean is... uh, how the Unseen of the Unseen created the intellects, about that. `i'lam anna ghayb al-ghuyub jalla wa-'ala... abda'a 'alam al-ibda' daf'atan wahidah` (Know that the Unseen of the Unseen, glorified and exalted is He... originated the world of origination in a single instance). That He created it in a single instance. `bi-la zamanin wa-la makanin` (without time or space). Not time, nor space. Time and space are later things. Meaning, 'Ashir created time and space. Meaning, what is time? The rising and setting of the sun, from that time is created. And space? First 'Ashir created space, and then he created time. Meaning, he created space, i.e., the world and the universe, and then he arranged the movement of the sun. So that is a much later thing, time and space. So this is a thing beyond and above time and space. `suwaran nuraniyyah kathirah la yusiha al-'adad` (luminous forms, numerous, which number cannot encompass). He created such forms that were very luminous, numerous, and number cannot encompass them. `mutasawin fi 'l-kamal al-awwal wa 'l-wujud al-awwal` (equal in the first perfection and the first existence). And they were equal in the first perfection and the first existence. The reality in which they were created, they were all created in the same reality. They were adorned with the same attributes. And `alladhi huwa al-hayat wa 'l-qudrah wa 'l-'ilm` (which is life, power, and knowledge). And He gave them life, power, and knowledge. Life, meaning in the most excellent state. He created them in the most excellent state. That they came into being in the most excellent state. And He gave them power, that they can do whatever they wish. Yes. And He gave them knowledge. Meaning the knowledge of what was and what will be. `wa-kana dhalika bi-mujibi 'adlihi ta'ala` (And that was by the requirement of His justice, the Exalted). And all this that Allah Ta'ala did, meaning the Unseen of the Unseen, was by the requirement of His very justice. `an ja'alahum siyan` (that He made them equal). That He made them all equal. `la fadla li-ahadin minhum 'ala akhar` (no one among them had any superiority over another). That no one among them had any superiority over another. `wa-kanu fi 'l-kathrah 'ala halin la tu'addu 'adadan` (And they were so numerous that their number could not be counted). And they were so numerous that their number could not be counted. `dalilun 'ala anna al-'uqul la tuhitu bi-mablaghi fadlihi wa-judihi ta'ala` (a proof that intellects cannot encompass the extent of His grace and His generosity, the Exalted). And... that... this is a proof that intellects... his grace and his generosity and bounty, which Allah has, meaning the Exalted Originator, it cannot be encompassed. `wa-hum yusammawna 'alam al-ibda'`. And they are called the World of Origination. Meaning, this... this... this is a very fine point. That the World of Origination is what? The spiritual world. `al-'alam ar-ruhani` (the spiritual world), they themselves are the intellects. It is not that a world was created, and Allah Ta'ala placed intellects in it, it didn't happen like that. `al-'uqul hum al-'alam ar-ruhani`. The intellects, they themselves are the spiritual world. And the World of Origination. `li-kawnihim arwahan nuraniyyah la kathafata fiha wa-la juthum wa-la yahwiha makan` (Because they are luminous spirits in which there is no density, nor any body, and space cannot contain them). And `wa-la ihtaja da'iha ila zaman` (and their invoker did not need time). And their originator did not need time for them. `wa-dalilu dhalika inna najidu nufusana wa-hiya min tilka al-'alam ka 'l-juz' al-haqir min kullin 'azimin al-khatir` (And the proof of that is that we find our souls, which are from that world, like a tiny part of a great and mighty whole). That is, we see, we find that our souls, which are a part of that world... a tiny part... which are from the world of intellects that have been created, so they are a tiny part of that world, we... `yaqta'u masafat ash-sharqi wa 'l-gharbi bi-jawalan al-khawatir fi aqalli min lamhi 'l-basar` (it traverses the distance of the east and the west through the wandering of thoughts in less than the blink of an eye). And our reality is that we can traverse from east to west. Our heart or our mind goes from one place to another instantly. Our mind instantly goes from one place to another, in the blink of an eye. Today it's here, and today it's miles away at that place. So this is our reality. `wa-taqdiru 'ala tasawwuri ma ghaba 'anha` (And it has power over conceiving what is absent from it). And what is absent from us, in that regard also, from an intellectual perspective, we can encompass it. `min ghayri an yahwiyaha min dhalika makanun aw yahtajju fihi ila zaman` (without it being contained by that place, or needing time for it). `bal ta'thuru fi fikratiha al-jihat al-ba'idah bal as-samawati wa 'l-ard wa-ma baynahuma fi aqalli min lahzah` (Rather, it affects in its thought the distant directions, even the heavens and the earth and what is between them, in less than a moment). We bring various directions into our thoughts, which are very far away, even the heavens and the earth, and what is between them, in less than a moment, they come into our minds. `fa-idha kana dhalika minna ma'a 'ajzina wa-qusurina` (When this is from us, despite our powerlessness and our deficiencies). When this is our reality, that despite our powerlessness and our deficiencies, this is our reality. `wa-kawn nufusina murtabitatan bi-ajsamina` (and our souls being connected to our bodies). And our... being in the physical world, despite that, this power and reality is present in our souls. `fa-kayfa bi-man huwa kamilun mutajarridun 'an al-ittihad bi 'l-ajsam` (So how would it be for one who is complete and abstract from being connected to bodies?). So what would be the reality of that which is complete and abstract? From being connected to bodies, from physical reality, from which there is no reality upon them. `fa-hiya idhan ma'ani suwari 'alam al-ibda' 'ala ma hiya min al-jalali wa 'sh-sharafi wa 'l-fadli wa 'l-kamal` (So then it is the meaning of the forms of the World of Origination, in their majesty, nobility, grace, and perfection). So what I mean is, the forms of the World of Origination, regarding them, that they were established in majesty, nobility, grace, and perfection, in such a high rank. `ya'juzu 'uqul al-bashari 'an idraki aqalli sifatin min sifatihim` (that the intellects of humankind are powerless to comprehend the least of their attributes). That our human intellects cannot comprehend their realities, the least of their attributes. `fa-kayfa yakunu min 'uqulin sabilun ila idraki mubdi'ihim` (So how can there be a way for the intellects to comprehend their Originator?). So how can a way be found to... to comprehend their Originator? `ma'a 'l-'ajzi 'an idraki mubda'atihi` (while being powerless to comprehend His origination). That we cannot comprehend our own intellects, and the intellects cannot comprehend their Originator, so how can we confess about their Originator? `bal huwa muta'alin 'an dhalika 'uluwwan kabira` (Rather, He is transcendent and higher than all that, a great transcendence). Rather, he is high and sublime from all those things, a great transcendence. Yes.

`thumma inna suwar...` No, this is another discussion.

And see how clearly he is explaining, one thing at a time. And among us, this Hindi and `Ajami` (non-Arab) `du'at`, this is their specialty, that their compositions, like those of Ali bin Sulayman, and Hasan Khan, and other `du'at`, the statements of the `hudud` of the da'wah, Sayyidna Akram al-Safi, although they are very high-level statements, they are so clear that a person understands them, understands them literally. But the Arab `du'at`, they have that high status, but they make the matter so ambiguous that it is very difficult to understand. Now, the reality of Sayyidna Hasan Khan is that the 70 books he wrote on `haqa'iq`, you don't need to look at a dictionary even once. He explained it in such an easy way. And what high-level topics he has clarified. Yes.

This is also very clear.

Yes, this is very clear. There is no complication.

And this is the same reality, that to say something easily is a very difficult task, whereas to say it in a difficult way is easier. Like Sayyidna Hamiduddin al-Kirmani, who was the `da'i` of Iraqain (the two Iraqs), meaning the `da'i` of Iran and Iraq, and who has a great rank, he became a `bab al-abwab`. So you see, a high-level book like `Rahat al-'Aql` (The Repose of the Intellect), which is a very voluminous book, you will see that you don't need a dictionary even once. But there are such subtleties in it, in the book `Rahat al-'Aql`, that once, Hadrat Fathullah Sahib Muqaddas was teaching the `hudud` of the da'wah. In those days, there used to be meetings with various shaykhs, they would come and go. So by chance, the `da'wah`... he was teaching in a room. So a learned person, a shaykh, came by chance. He said, "Mawlana, which book are you teaching?" He took the book in his hand. From Hadrat Fathullah Sahib Muqaddas's hand. It was `Rahat al-'Aql`. So, Hadrat... he saw it, he was reading it, he was a scholar of Arabic anyway, but he looked at it, turned the pages here and there. Then Hadrat Fathullah Sahib, who was very witty and quick with a retort, he said, "Mawlana, this is `rahat al-'aql` (repose of the intellect) for us, but `kulfat al-'aql` (a burden for the intellect) for you." This is `rahat al-'aql` for us, but a burden for your intellect.

As Sayyidna Husayn bin Ahmad, Sayyidna Sharfi, Sayyidna Ali bin Husayn, the father of Wawaam, who stayed here for two years in Hindustan. When you were in Hyderabad, you were teaching. So our method is that the beneficiaries... they determine everything from grammar, that this is written in the grammar. So one gentleman said, "This is the `khabar` (predicate) and this is the `mubtada` (subject), this is the `khabar`." So you said, he said, "O Allah, read! The `mubtada` is here, and the `khabar` is with Allah." The `mubtada` is here, and the `khabar` is with Allah. And you had said another very good sentence, that your example, O Indians, is like this: you caught the cow, held its horns, and we milked it. To control the cow, you held its horns, but in the meantime, we milked it. Meaning you were caught up in the entanglements of grammar, while we obtained the essence.

So I have also reflected on this, that too much grammar is not needed. To read the books of the da'wah, you will see that if a dictionary of the books of the da'wah were made, very easily, because the words and the accents and their noble names repeat quite a lot. So, if a person becomes familiar with a little bit of grammar, it is enough to read the books of the da'wah. Yes. It's not that one should get into the narrow alleys of it, spend one's life learning grammar, and not come to the actual book and the actual topic. Yes. So I mentioned once that until a person learns to read without understanding, he can never read Arabic. Without understanding? Without understanding. Until he learns to read without understanding, he can never read Arabic. Meaning what? That you take a book, buy a book from the market, for example, my... my experience is that I used to take a book from the market and I would start reading it. So when I started reading, it's my habit to mark, in my own books. So the things... like `Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim`, or `hamd`, or some such things... those sentences which I understood, completely, 100%, I would mark them. In this way, I would read the whole book. And I would put it aside in it. Then I took another book. Now, the book I had read, I only understood 25% of it. I didn't understand 75%. So I put it aside. After that, I took another book, in that I understood 30%. Then I put it aside. In this way, I read 10-15 books. Then, then I would again start with that first book, after a year had passed. A year. And after a year passed, I would start with the first book again, and I would see that what I had understood 25% of, now I understood 50% of it. Whereas I wasn't studying grammar. But reading, and reading, and reading... such a reality comes to a person that he starts to understand. The main thing is to understand. The Urdu we read, the Urdu speeches we give, the Urdu sermons we deliver, we write letters and we write `majalis`, have we ever studied the grammar of Urdu? No, we haven't. So by reading and reading, we learn all these things. In the same way, Arabic, you learn it by reading. It starts to make sense.

But the `zer` and `zabar` (vowel markings) can make a big difference, the meaning changes. If we don't understand this...

Yes, yes. Basic grammar is necessary for Arabic. But to get into its intricacies, its alleys, to do it completely, that's not necessary. Yes, if someone wants to become a master, if someone wants to do research, if someone wants to write books, his situation is different. But for us, we have to read the books of the da'wah, understand them, and mend our own path to salvation. For that, this much is enough.

[Prayer in Arabic]
