[Phone ringing]
Yes. Hello?
Yes.
It's 3:30.
Yes.
It got disconnected.
What happens, what doesn't, what, what is in this...
It's 3:30.

Assalamu alaikum, brother.
Wa alaikum assalam.

A'udhu billahi minash shaitanir-rajim (I seek refuge in Allah from the accursed Satan). Bi-fadli Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim (By the grace of, In the name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful). Wa bihi nasta'in wa sallallahu 'ala rasulihi Sayyidina Muhammadin wa 'ala aali Muhammadin wa barik wa sallim (And in Him we seek help, and may Allah's blessings and peace be upon His Messenger, our master Muhammad, and upon the family of Muhammad). Read from the end of the twenty... the twenty-second page. That: wa kana al-mudabbir ta'ala mayyaza asfa dhalik al-matar (And the Exalted Planner distinguished the purest of that rain). Wa al-mudabbir ta'ala (And the Exalted Planner) distinguished, separated, what was that water that was descending from the sky, that is, the rain's [water], He separated it. And, wa ashrafuhu wa afdaluhu wa altafuhu wa asqahu (And its noblest, its most excellent, its most subtle, and its purest [part]). And in it, that rain's water, the part that was its noblest, and its most excellent part, and its most subtle part, so he... he took it... towards ashraf-i-biqa' (the noblest of places). And the noble places that exist, among them the noblest of places, it was taken there. Fi awwal al-kawr (in the first epoch), in the first epoch. And at that time, the noblest place was Sarandib. Because, mawda' i'tidal al-ard (the locus of earthly equilibrium). Because that was the locus of earthly equilibrium. Yes. Wa suwwisa yawma'idhin. Wa takawwana fi tilka al-qudad al-ka'ina fiha (And there was formed in those depressions that were in it). And in those depressions, the pits that were there, in them, samaniya wa 'ishrin shakhsan (twenty-eight individuals), the formation of twenty-eight individuals took place. Hum fi ash-sharafi was-safa wal-fadli 'ala sa'ir al-bashar (They are in honor, purity, and excellence above all other humans). And they, in nobility, and in purity, and in excellence, were more excellent than all of mankind. Bi-manzilati al-yaqut al-ahmar (With the rank of the red ruby). Just as the rank of the red ruby is in nobility over a stone, over other stones. Yes.
This would mean they were superior to those from other pits.
They were superior to all. At one point, Amir al-Mu'minin said, anal-yaqut al-ahmar (I am the red ruby). Anal-yaqut al-ahmar... wa Rasulullah salawatullahi 'ala al-yaqut al-asfar (I am the red ruby... and the Messenger of Allah, may Allah's blessings be upon him, is the yellow ruby). He said this.
Is there also a yaqut al-asfar (yellow ruby)?
There is asfar too. Meaning, the yellow... yellow ruby.
Yes, the yellow one.
It is aswad (black) also, it is more popular among the common people...
Shakhs wahid (one individual), and among the twenty-eight people, there is one individual who is superior to all of them in nobility and excellence, ma li-yaqut al-ahmar 'ala al-hajar (like the [superiority] of the red ruby over a stone). Just as there is the red ruby over a stone. Wa huwa zubdat al-'alam (And he is the essence of the world). And the one who is being talked about from the *jussa ibda'iyah*. Wa huwa zubdat al-'alam wa safwa wa khulasatuhu (And he is the essence of the world, its choicest part and its extract). And he was the *zubdah* (essence), the extract, of the world, and its *safwat* (choicest part) and extract. Wa hadha ash-sharaf hasil li-hadhihi ath-thamaniyah wa 'ishrin shakhs 'ala sa'ir al-bashar (And this honor was attained by these twenty-eight individuals over all other humans). And this nobility was attained by these twenty-eight people over all of mankind. Wa lil-wahid 'ala as-sab' wa 'ishrin (And for the one over the twenty-seven). And one [attained it] over the other twenty-eight... twenty-seven. Min ajli safa' an-niyyah (Because of the purity of intention). From his purity of intention. Because of it. Wa kathrati nadamihi 'inda khatiyyatihi (And his great remorse for his fault). That is, from the *jussa ibda'iyah*'s purity of intention, and when the fault occurred on his part, at the call of 'Ashir, so when he repented, he repented with great remorse, because of which this nobility was granted to him, even over the twenty-seven. F kana hadha al-wahid lahum huwa safwat al-'alam (So this one was for them the choicest of the world). And this one individual was the choicest of the world, and its *zubdah* (essence), and its *khulasa* (extract), and was the noblest among all of them. Fa-lamma zahara min tilka al-qudad ka-zuhuri abna' jinsihi (So when he emerged from those depressions like the emergence of his own species). When those depressions became manifest, just as the depressions of the sons of his species became manifest, his companions, so nazara dhatuhu bi-dhatihi (he looked at his own essence with his own essence). So he looked at his own essence, with his own essence. Min ghayri mu'allimin (Without a teacher). Without any teacher. Wa la mulhimin (And without an inspirer). And not with the help of any inspirer. Ila al-'alam (Towards the world). And... and so he looked towards the world and contemplated. Fa-ra'a sama'an mabniyyah (And he saw a constructed sky). And he saw that above him is a sky that has been made. Wa ardan madhiyyah (And a spread-out earth). And the earth is what has been spread. Wa asnafan min al-khala'iq mukhtalifah (And different species of creatures). And various kinds of creatures are there. Fa-'alima bi-fikratihi (So he knew by his intellect). So he knew from his intellect, wa hajama bi-dhatihi (and he judged with his essence), and he judged his essence 'ala al-khalqi (upon the creation), upon the creations. Inna lahum... (that for them...). That is, the process of his contemplation is ongoing. Inna lahu wa li-abna' jinsihi wa lil-'alam ka'afatan mubdi'an (That he himself and the sons of his species and the entire world have a Creator). That he himself, him, and जो the sons of his species, his companions, and for the entire world, there is one who has brought them into being, a Creator (*mubdi'*). Huwa bi-khilafihim (He is different from them). And He is different from them. That is, He is not from among them. That *mubdi'* is not from among all these; He is some other being. Fa-nafa al-ilahiyyah 'anhum (So he negated divinity from them). So he negated the divinity of all of them. Ke *nist* se *hast* mein laane ki quwwat (The power to bring from non-existence into existence) is not in any of them. Darja-i-'aql-i-awwal ke jaisa hunar hai (It is a skill like that of the rank of the first intellect). Yes. The same state is occurring. Wa 'anhum wa aqarra biha li-mubdi'ihi (And from them, and he affirmed it for his Creator). And he affirmed this matter that the attribute of divinity is in his Creator. Wa shahida biha li-khaliqihim (And he bore witness with it for their Creator). And he bore witness to it for his Creator. Fa-qama fi al-'alam ad-dani (So he stood in the lower world). And he stood in this lower world, in the world, maqam as-sabiq al-awwal (the station of the First Precedent). Just as the *sabiq al-awwal* had stood in the spiritual world. That is, just as the station of *'aql al-awwal* was in the spiritual world, in the same way, his station became in the world of... the world, in the lower world. Fa-ittasala bihi qistuhu min al-maddah wa at-ta'id (So his portion of substance and support connected with him). As soon as his intellect became pure and clean, so his substance and support became جاری (operative) from him. Now see, this became a principle that if there is a good intellect, the thought of a person, whether he is a *mu'min mustajib* (a responsive believer) or of the high *hudud* (ranks), then it is necessary that from the side of the *'ali 'alayh* (the exalted one), supports (*ta'idat*) become operative for all of them. This principle has been established. Just as it happened for the *'aql al-awwal*, just as it happened for the *jussa ibda'iyah*. In our world too, in this world too, if someone has a clean and pure intellect, and our thought is clean, and we are populating the world of our actions, then it is necessary that help and support from Allah should come to us. Yes. So this is a matter of principle. Yes.
The *ibda'iyah* who were born, they were born with their knowledge, they knew their own status, what they were.
Even then, just as Imams are born, the Imam also has to acquire knowledge, right? As it is in the Holy Quran, that, "We brought you forth from your mothers' wombs in a state where you knew nothing." So this thing is for the creatures, and it is for the Imams as well. So the Imams also have to study. It's another matter that they are *ma'sum* (infallible) from the beginning, they have studied, but a *tarikh* (history) is formed, a *sirat* (biography) is formed, and they have to study. Yes.
The one who becomes the *walid-i-tam* (perfect father), his son who will be from the *jussa ibda'iyah*, will he be greater than all the others who are born from the other pits?
No. The twenty-seven individuals... the twenty-seven individuals, the *jussa ibda'iyah* took the twenty-seven individuals, and his *haykal* (physical form) was prepared, and from here, the *takhlis al-'alam* (purification of the world) occurred. Yes. So they are superior. The twenty-seven individuals...
At the time of *imamat*, the child who is... is he the *khulasa-i-'alam* (essence of the world)?
His *takhlis* (purification) happened. The twenty-seven individuals departed from the world with the *jussa ibda'iyah*. And this one from the *jussa* is superior to those people who are born naturally. Yes.
This much honor he definitely has, that he was the first Imam. The *imamat* started from him. From the son of the *jussa ibda'iyah*, this *imamat* started. So the honor of being the first, which is attained, is a great thing. So he was the first Imam. That is, of the *dawr al-kashf* (epoch of manifestation) and of the *kawr* (epoch) itself, he was the first Imam. The *imamat*, until the day of resurrection, for as long as it continues, it will continue in his lineage. Whether it is the *dawr al-kashf*, the *dawr al-sitr* (epoch of concealment), the *dawr al-fatrah* (epoch of interval), the eras will keep changing, but the offspring will be from his lineage. This matter is settled.
And the one who will be of the *awwal* (first), whom they call *'aql-i-awwal*, he will also have other pits, right? He will take all of them?
No, from the pits that were born... No. He... the *jussa ibda'iyah* will gather the twenty-seven people. And from here, the *takhlis al-'alam* will happen.
From him too, people were born from the pits.
What the statement is for others, we will see, but the statement that has come is that for these *jussa*s... the *jussa ibda'iyah*, taking the twenty-seven individuals, from here the *takhlis al-'alam* will happen, and his *haykal* will be prepared. From the twenty-seven. And the twenty-seven are not ordinary individuals. They are *zubdah* (essence), they are cream.
For what period did they... did they progress?
No, that... I don't remember what... in what period... when... when did they depart from here... how long was the period, it is not mentioned in this. But this much is that, from here their *takhlis al-'alam* happened.
So, just as the station of *'aql al-awwal* was, his station is in this meaning in the world. Yes. Fa-ittasala bihi qistuhu min al-maddah (So his portion from the substance connected with him). And substance and support connected with him, 'ala yadi as-sabiq al-awwal (at the hands of the First Precedent). At the hands of the *sabiq al-awwal*. Bi-wasitati sa'ir al-'uqul al-ibda'iyah (through the intermediary of all the creative intellects). Through the intermediary of the creative intellects. That is, it did not happen directly. Directly, from the *sabiq al-awwal*, from the *'aql al-awwal*, the *jussa ibda'iyah* did not receive support directly, but in between, his... all the creative intellects were included. Through them, it happened. Yes. Wa wasilati haddihi al-mujid lahu al-mustakhrij lahu min 'alam at-tabi'ah (and the means of his rank, the one who brings him into existence, the one who extracts him from the world of nature). And through the intermediary of his rank, such that the one who creates it, such that the one who extracts it, from the world of nature. Wa sharafa bi-tilka al-maddah allati wasalatuhu wa abna'a jinsihi (And he was ennobled by that substance which reached him and the sons of his species). And because of that substance, he found nobility. And... and those things also reached all the sons of his species. Wa 'alima biha ma kana wa ma sayakun (And he knew by it what was and what will be). And this substance and support that he received, the *jussa ibda'iyah*, because of it, he came to know what was and what will be. That is, this state was granted to him. Just as *'aql al-awwal* was granted it, just as *muba'ath as-sabil* was granted it, just as the creative intellects were granted it. So, he too was granted it. Thumma abala 'ala as-sab' wa 'ishrina ash-shakhs (Then he turned to the twenty-seven individuals). Then he turned his attention towards the twenty-seven individuals. Alladhina kanu ma'ahu (who were with him). Such that those people were with him. Fa-da'ahum ila al-iqrar billahi ta'ala wal-wahdaniyyah (So he called them to affirm Allah Ta'ala and His Oneness). And he called them to the affirmation, that you should affirm Allah Ta'ala with His Oneness. Wa i'tirafi bil-ilahiyyah (And acknowledge His divinity). To acknowledge divinity. Wa nafi'u 'anhum jamian (And negate it from all of them). So, they negated this quality of divinity from themselves, that this quality of divinity is not in us. Fa-ajabu ila dhalika (So they responded to that). And they responded to his words with "labbayk" (here I am). Wa kana jami'u dhalika huwa ma'ana wa lillahi ta'ala (And all of that was its meaning, and for Allah Ta'ala). And, just as it had happened there in the spiritual world, that 'Ashir... it had happened that there were those who denied him, and... that state did not happen here. All twenty-seven individuals affirmed it. And as soon as he said it, they brought faith in him and denied divinity [for themselves]. And they acknowledged... the Creator, Allah Ta'ala.
They had already affirmed the *mubdi' ta'ala*. This would not be of *muba'ath awwal*?
No, no. They affirmed the *mubdi' ta'ala* also, as it was mentioned earlier, they affirmed the *mubdi' ta'ala* also, that He is their... someone who creates them, brings them into being, that is, the *mubdi' ta'ala*. They affirmed that there as well, and they affirmed *'aql al-awwal* and *muba'ath as-sabil* as well. Wa shahidallahu (And Allah bore witness). And this same matter, Allah has stated, that shahidallahu annahu la ilaha illa huwa (Allah has borne witness that there is no god but He). That Allah Ta'ala has borne witness that there is no deity except Him. Wal-mala'ikatu (and the angels). And the angels have also borne witness to this matter. And ulul-'ilm (the people of knowledge), the people of knowledge have. Wa kana ismullahi waqi'an 'ala al-'aql al-awwal (And the name of Allah was applied to the First Intellect). And here, in "shahidallah", so that... the name of Allah is applied to *'aql al-awwal*. AC, please turn it off. This is making me cough.
Here, Allah is on *'aql al-awwal*, and 'huwa' (He) is on *mubdi' ta'ala*.
He, as it is in other books also, that he was compelled, because he could not say anything else for the *mubdi' ta'ala*, so he gestured and said "huwa" (He). That he acknowledged that my *mubdi'*... he acknowledged the *mubdi'*. And he referred to him with "huwa". And this, as Sayyidna Mu'ayyad himself said, that this is such a sin, *dhambun mashfu'un bil-istighfar* (a sin accompanied by seeking forgiveness). This is such a sin, saying "huwa" is also such a sin, that it has been linked with seeking forgiveness. Yes.
Then what happened? That, wal-mala'ikah (and the angels), the mention of the angels that is made here, that the angels have borne witness, so who are those angels? Tilka al-'uqul al-mujarradah (Those incorporeal intellects). Al-mubadirah ila da'watihi ash-shahidah bima shahida bihi (Who hastened to his call, bearing witness to what he bore witness to). That they are the intellects who were incorporeal, that is, they did not possess physicality in the spiritual world. And they hastened to accept his call. That is, *'aql al-awwal*'s and *muba'ath as-sabil*'s call... *'aql al-awwal* did not make a call. If *'aql al-awwal* had made a call and the intellects had accepted his call, then a circle would have formed for him in which the intellects would have gathered. But he did not... his call happened through *muba'ath as-sabil*. Yes.
Here, the angels he is saying are from the second to the tenth, right?
They are nine... nine intellects.
Those *jussa ibda'iyah* who were born on earth, they had denied 'Ashir, I mean, the *khalq* (creation). First, they should...
They had denied 'Ashir, but they had repented there, right? That's why it is said, "nadimin" (the remorseful), "I am among those who repent," their remorse was the greatest. They were the ones who repented the most.
So first, after they came, what did they affirm? They had already affirmed the *mubdi' ta'ala*. They had also affirmed the *'aql al-awwal*. So first, they had to affirm that which they had denied.
No, they affirmed that too, but they affirmed the *mubdi' ta'ala* here as well, in the world. And they affirmed all the intellects as well. That their greatness has been established upon us. He mentioned that. And that these intellects, they have hastened to accept his call. Whose? *'Aql al-awwal*'s. That is, the call that *'aql al-awwal* made through *muba'ath as-sabil*. Ash-shahidah bima shahida bihi (Bearing witness to what he bore witness to). And they bore witness that, just as he had borne witness. That is, just as he had borne witness to Allah, the *mubdi' ta'ala*, so they also bore witness in the same way. Wa kana ulul-'ilm (And the people of knowledge). And the people of knowledge are, who are they? Hadha ash-shakhs al-fadil (This noble individual). This is the *sahib jussa ibda'iyah*. Sahib jussa ibda'iyah and his *hudud* (ranks). As-sab' wa 'ishrin (The twenty-seven). The twenty-seven *hudud* who are there, he himself and the twenty-seven *hudud*, all these are al-mujibuna li-da'watihi (the ones who respond to his call), who are accepting his call. Whose? The *shakhs-i-fadil*'s, the *jussa ibda'iyah*'s call. Ash-shahiduna bima shahida bihi (Bearing witness to what he bore witness to). And they are bearing witness just as the *mubdi' ta'ala*... the *jussa ibda'iyah* had given the testimonies for *'aql al-awwal*, *mubdi' ta'ala*, *muba'ath as-sabil*, and for all the intellects. So they also did it in the same way, they gave their testimony. Wa kinaya 'anhum bi-ulil-'ilm (And a metaphor for them is 'the people of knowledge'). And that is why they are alluded to as the people of knowledge. Li-annahum mahill al-mawad wa at-ta'idat (Because they are the repository of substances and supports). Because they were the place for the falling of substances and supports. That is, the intellects... that is, this *jussa* and *sab'a wa 'ishrina*... the companions who were with them. Alladhi huwa 'ilm al-'aqli (Which is intellectual knowledge). Such that that was his intellectual knowledge. Alladhi amaddahu bihi (With which he was supported). Which was given to him. Wa wahiduhum (And one of them). Wa amaddahum huwa bihi 'ala qadri maratibihim fi as-safa wal-ijabah (And he supported them with it according to their ranks in purity and response). And each one, who was his companion, their ranks were established according to their purity and their response. Yes. That is, among them too... among the twenty-seven, ranks were established. Yes. That is, they are not of one rank. But they, in their... repentance, in their turning, and in their gnosis, and in their testimony, all hold their own ranks. Yes.
Here, with the Imam, it must be the same way. The *hujjatul layl*, the *hujjatul nahar*.
Absolutely. Everyone has different ranks. And from within them, He chooses. The ones he chooses for *hujjatul layl*, the ones he chooses for *hujjatul nahar*. The *hujjatul layl* who are with the Imam, always in his presence, they are superior to the *hujjatul nahar*. Yes.
The *bab al-abwab* and *bab al-batin* would also be among them? In the twelve? The *bab al-batin*. The Imam's *bab al-batin*, is he among the twelve or separate?
No, the twelve... the *bab al-batin* is from here. He... he... no. The *bab al-zahir* and the *bab al-batin* are right here. Yes. Because from among the twelve... from among the twelve is the *bab al-zahir* and the *bab al-batin*.
From among the twelve.
So the *bab al-batin* who is there would be in the presence, right? When he is so close to the Imam...
No. In the presence, as far as I know, in the presence are the *bab al-imbi'as* (gate of emanation). Yes. The *bab al-imbi'as*. The *bab al-batin* is superior. And the *bab al-imbi'as* is even superior to him. Superior to him.
It will have to be seen, what reply the Du'at have given to it. But this much is that, this verse that has been recited, `shahidallahu annahu la ilaha illa huwa wal-mala'ikatu wa ulul-'ilmi qa'iman bil-qist, la ilaha illa huwa al-'aziz al-hakim`, this verse is a very special verse. That in the Holy Quran, the *kalimah la ilaha illallah* (there is no god but Allah), which has five different intonations, what are the five intonations? *La ilaha illallah*, *la ilaha illa huwa*, *la ilaha illa ana*, *la ilaha illalladhi*, *la ilaha illa anta*. In these five intonations, the *kalimah shahadah* (testimony) has come. In this, here, the one that has come, `shahidallahu annahu la ilaha illa huwa`, in this intonation, so you will see that in the Holy Quran, how many of these *kalimat* (words/phrases) are there in total? Thirty-seven. There are thirty-seven *kalimat*. And thirty-seven *kalimat* are in thirty-six verses. It's repeated once. So it's in thirty-six verses. That is, in one verse, it has come twice. And that verse is this one. In `shahidallah`. It has come twice in this. And because of this, this verse has great importance. That's why its *tasbih* (glorification) is also done. The *tasbih* of this verse is also done, and there is great power in it, in this *tasbih* also, there is great power because in this verse, the *kalimah shahadah* has come twice. Secondly, that Sayyidna 'Abdullah bin... what is his name... al-Wazir... 'Abd al-'Ali bin... 'Abd al-'Ali, who is a Da'i in our presence. So he wrote a book, and in it, he mentioned that when a person recites these thirty-six... these *kalimat*, his prayer is immediately accepted. Just as in our Majmu' al-Ad'iyah, it has been mentioned, of all... the thirty-six verses. The thirty-six verses have been mentioned. And then a tradition has also been narrated, of Qadi Shurayh. That whoever recites this will attain ten states. So its mention has been made. So he too says that the person who recites this, for him these states will be achieved and his prayer will be accepted immediately. By its blessing. Through these thirty-six verses. And this is... in one verse, it is twice. Yes.
Qadi Shurayh who was at the time of Imam Husayn?
No, that's a different Qadi Shurayh. That's a different one. What happened to Qadi Shurayh was that his eyesight was lost. His eyesight was lost. So he came to the Messenger of Allah, and he said, "O Messenger of Allah, my eyesight has been almost lost, so what should I do?" So he said, "In the Holy Quran, in the manner in which, in the intonation in which this *kalimah shahadah* has been said, read those intonations in the same order." So he started reading it. And by reading it, his eyesight returned. This state happened. So this is a very powerful thing. In our place too, the prayer for Buddha, in the prayer for Buddha, this... the *kalimat at-tahlil* (phrases of declaring God's oneness), the verses of *tahlil*, this entire verse is mentioned in it. Yes.
Thumma inna al-qamar rafada zuhal fi at-tadbir alfa sanah (Then the moon assisted Jupiter in the administration for a thousand years). And then the moon, which is the last *'aql* (intellect) of the *kawr*, so it supported Jupiter in the administration for a thousand years. Wa huwa alfa sa'adah wa qiyam ad-da'wah ash-sharifah (And it is a thousand years of felicity and the establishment of the Noble Mission). And it was a thousand years of felicity, and the establishment of the *da'wah sharifah* took place. Yes. Yes. Wa ijtima' al-kawakib kulluha thumma... (And the conjunction of all the planets, then...). And the *da'wah sharif* (Noble Mission), what is it? It is not the name of a room. Or of any chamber. But the *da'wah sharif* is, it... in the spiritual world, it is the name of the intellects. And in the physical world, it is the name of these *hudud*. The assembly that was formed by these *hudud* is the *da'wah sharif*.
Wa ijtima' al-kawakib kulluha thumma inna ash-shakhs al-fadil farraqa min as-sab' wa 'ishrin (And the conjunction of all the planets, then the noble individual separated from the twenty-seven). And this noble individual, that is, the *jussa ibda'iyah*, he separated twenty-seven individuals... he... differentiated them. That is, he sent them to different places. Ila ithna 'ashar jazirah (To the twelve islands). The twelve islands of the earth.
But at that time, there was nothing, how did they...
Yes. From one continent to another... it would be very difficult.
The twelve islands, he sent them there. Yadu'unahum ila 'ibadatillah (Calling them to the worship of Allah). So that they may call them to the worship of Allah. Wa ila ta'atihi (And to His obedience). And towards Allah's obedience. Wa yu'allimunahum (And they teach them).
Whom are they giving the call to?
At that time, whoever... the *jussa*s, etc., who were born in the islands.
The *jussa*s who were born.
And... they would be very few, right?
No, people... many *jussa*s were born in different places, in the islands as well.
Wa yu'allimunahum (And they teach them). So that they may teach them. What thing? 'Ilm al-ma'ash (the knowledge of worldly life). How to earn a living. Wa 'ilm al-ma'ad (And the knowledge of the Hereafter). And how their return will be. From this world. Wa 'allama kulla wahidin minhum lughata man ursila ilayhim (And he taught each one of them the language of those to whom he was sent). And he taught them, each one of them among them, the language, of those towards whom they were sent. That is, he also taught the language. Li-anna li-kulli jaziratin lughah (Because every island has a language). Because every island had its own language. Yes. Wa huwa ma'ana qawlillahi ta'ala wa ma arsalna min rasulin illa bi-lisani qawmihi (And it is the meaning of the saying of Allah Ta'ala, 'And We have not sent any messenger except in the language of his people'). And as Allah Ta'ala says, that "We have not sent any messenger from among the messengers, except that he would speak in the language of his people." Wa lawla al-wahy wa at-ta'id al-muttasil bi-tilka ash-shakhs al-fadil (And had it not been for the revelation and the support connected to that noble individual). And if there had not been revelation and support which was connected to this noble individual, wa ittila'uhu 'ala ma fi al-'alam (and his awareness of what is in the world), and that he was aware of whatever was happening in the world, bima kana wa sayakun (of what was and what will be), and what has happened and what will happen, ma qadara ahadun min al-bashar (no one from mankind would have been able). And whatever of mankind has happened, an yu'allim min tilqa'i nafsihi (that he should teach from himself), so that he should make them understand, from his own self, khawas al-ma'adin wal-nabat wal-hayawan (the properties of minerals, plants, and animals). He taught them that, what are the properties of minerals, khawas al-ma'adin wal-nabat wal-hayawan. Minerals, and plants, and animals. And he made them understand their properties. Wa manafi' dhalika (And their benefits). And how benefit can be derived from them. From minerals, from plants, and from animals. Wa madarriha wa adwiyatiha an-nafi'ah (And their harms and their beneficial medicines). And what are their harms, from minerals and plants and animals, what harms can occur, and from them, from their medicines, what benefits can be obtained. Wa sumumiha al-qatilah (And their deadly poisons). And how there are poisons that are killers. He made them aware of all these things. Wa hadha tahqiq ma qala Allahu ta'ala (And this is the verification of what Allah Ta'ala said). And this is what Allah Ta'ala has stated in His word, He has stated it, that wa 'allama Adama al-asma'a kullaha (And He taught Adam all the names). That Allah Ta'ala taught Adam the knowledge of all names. Li-anna hadha ash-shakhs al-fadil (Because this noble individual). In brackets. Wa hadha ash-shakhs al-fadil huwa al-Adam al-awwal (And this noble individual is the First Adam). Wa huwa... Abu al-Bashar (And he is... the Father of Humanity). That this noble individual, he... he was the First Adam. That is, one was the spiritual Adam, that was 'Ashir. And 'Ashir is the spiritual Adam. But this is the First Adam. Who? Jussa ibda'iyah. And he is their father. Yes. Min haythu annahu mu'allimuhum yu'allimuhum amra ma'ashihim (In the sense that he is their teacher, teaching them the matter of their worldly life). Because in this sense, that he is their teacher, that he is teaching them about their worldly affairs.
[Phone ringing]
Yes, I'll do it. I'll do it.
Have you put it on call-forwarding?
Yes, yes, I have.
[Phone ringing]
And he is teaching them about their worldly and otherworldly affairs. That is why he became the cause of their life, in this world and in the Hereafter. That how they should spend their worldly life and how they should attain the beneficial life of the Hereafter. Wa lawla fadlullahi 'alayhim bi-imdadihi bima amaddahu minhu mimma istahaqqahu bi-tasbihi wa tadbirihi lirabbihi ta'ala la-halaku (And had it not been for the grace of Allah upon them, with His support, with what He supported him, from what he deserved by his glorification and his administration for his Lord, the Exalted, they would have perished). If Allah's grace had not been upon them, through his support, by which He supported him, for which he became deserving through his glorification and his administration that he did for the Lord Ta'ala, then they would have all perished. That is, Allah's grace was established upon them. Yes.
In the Quran, there is `lawla fadlullahi 'alaykum` (had it not been for the grace of Allah upon you), if Allah's grace was not upon you... yes. So they would have been in a state of punishment. So here, what is being mentioned? That if Allah's grace had not been there. That is, those who come out of punishments, the punishments of the accursed ones, it is for one *kawr* (epoch). Yes. But some, due to their *mujibat-i-'adliyah* (just deserts), they are taken out before that. Just as... Umar bin 'Abd al-'Aziz. So he... before his time, he was taken out, or will be taken out. So through the volcanoes on the mountains, through the lava, they come out. And then they... from the grass, the plant that grows, from the plant, their return happens. In human form. So, the reason for this is the good deeds they have done. So its reward is given. Just as, what did he do? The seventy thousand pulpits from which the cursing and reviling of Janab 'Ali 'alayhis-salam was done, he stopped that. And the garden of Fadak, he returned it to the Ahl al-Bayt. These two great... he did the works of reward. Yes.
The lava that erupts from volcanoes, we often see that in Africa, or in Japan, there are no believers living there, so the things that grow from those plants, only the infidels eat them, right? So then their return...
No, it happens in human form. It happens in human form. Then after that, when they say "tawba 'alayh" (repentance upon him), then slowly, slowly...
They will come into other cycles.
Yes.
The human form is a common platform. From that platform, people fall and also climb. The common platform is the human form. Yes.
Taqaddama kulla da'in minhum ila jaziratihi (Each da'i from them went forth to his island). So every da'i who was of the island, in his island, what did he do? Fa-'allamahum kayfa yattakhidhuna min ash-shajar ath-thiyab (So he taught them how they make clothes from the tree). So that da'i taught them, the people there, how they take clothes from the tree... they make clothes. And how they use the clothes... their clothes. Wa yanaluna minhu... min al-ma'adin wal-hayawan al-ghidha' (And they obtain from it... from the minerals and the animals, food). And how they obtain it and benefit from it. And from minerals and animals, food. And how food can be obtained. Wa 'allamahum tariq an-najat bi-'ibadatillahi ta'ala (And he taught them the way of salvation through the worship of Allah Ta'ala). Wa ta'atihi wa ta'ati waliyyihi al-mustafa fi ardihi salawatullahi 'alayh (And His obedience and the obedience of His chosen wali on His earth, may Allah's blessings be upon him). And he also made them understand and know that what is the way of salvation. From the worship of Allah... that is, by worshipping Allah, how they will get salvation. And from Allah's obedience, and from the obedience of his *wali* (friend/guardian), who is chosen in his land. That is, the Imam of the time. That is, he made them understand and taught them that after the *jussa ibda'iyah*, the line of *imamat* will continue from his son, and in every age, there will be an Imam. He made them understand all these things. Wa aqama hadha ash-shakhs al-fadil bi-hadratihi (And this noble individual established in his presence). And this individual who is noble, that is... Jussa ibda'iyah... the one who is a noble individual, he stood up and established in his presence... bi-hadratihi ithna 'ashar shakhsan (in his presence, twelve individuals). That his presence, where he was, in Sarandib, he kept twelve individuals in his presence. Hum hujjatul layl (They are the Hujjatul Layl - the Proofs of the Night). And they are called Hujjatul Layl. They are the most excellent. Who are associated with Salat al-Layl (the Night Prayer). They are associated with Salat al-Layl. In Salat al-Layl, just as we pray two, two rak'at in Tahajjud and make du'a, so here, twelve rak'at are prayed at once. Yes. So, this means that they are not separate. These *hujjat*s, who are the *hujjatul layl*, they are not separate. Whereas the *hujjatun nahar* (Proofs of the Day), the *hujjatun nahar*, they are in separate places. One is in one island, another is in another island. And among them too, what happens is that one is tied to another. That is why the prayer is offered after two, two rak'at. That is, one, one da'i... two *hujjatun nahar* of a da'i are tied with another da'i. One is higher, one is lower. So in this way, there are two, two, in this way is the arrangement. Yes.
Hum hujjatul layl (They are the Hujjatul Layl). And they are the *hujjatul layl*. And the Tahajjud is for the *hujjatun nahar*. And the du'a that is in the end, that is for the Da'wat (mission). That is, for the twelve... these *hujjatul layl*, and that du'a is a call to Qa'im Al-i-Islam (the Riser of the family of Islam). That is, to call them. To call them to Qa'im Al-i-Islam. Their joining is with the Qa'im. Or, at that time, with the Imam. So, to call them to that.
Wa minhum arba'ah tusamma al-khurum (And among them are four who are called the Khurum). And in his presence are... they are more excellent than the twenty-seven. From them are four who are called the *khurum*, and among those... those twelve also, four are such that they are... more excellent than the eight among them. That is, twelve, twelve *hujjatul layl*, they are more excellent than the twenty-seven. And they are separate, the twenty-seven are separate. No, in the same... in the twenty-seven itself. The *hujjatul layl* whom he kept with him, did not send anywhere. Just as he sent the others. So those *hujjatul layl* who are with him, they are superior to the twenty-seven who are... who were born with the *jussa*. They are superior to them. These twelve people. And among the twelve also, four are *khurum* who are superior to the other eight. Twelve, so four came out, so the remaining eight are superior to them. Wa min al-arba'ah wahid (And from the four is one). And among the four also, there is one who is superior to the four. Wa huwa al-bab (And he is the Bab). And he is the Bab. Huwa al-bab li-dhalika al-maqam al-karim (He is the Bab for that noble station). The Bab is of that noble station, that is, of the Imam. The station (*maqam*) applies to three people. One is the Imam, second is the Wasi, and third is the Nabi. The word *maqam* is used for three people. So here, it is a reference to the Imam, or to the *jussa ibda'iyah* himself, that he became the Bab of the *jussa ibda'iyah*. Wa nasaba bayna yadayhi (And he appointed before him). And he appointed in front of him, ma'a da'ihi fi jaziratihi (with his da'i in his island). With one da'i who will be in his island. That is, he will be in his own presence. Mukasiran wa ma'dhun mutlaqan wa da'ian mahsuran (a Mukasir, a Ma'dhun Mutlaq, and a Da'i Mahsur). That is, three people will be in his island. A Ma'dhun Mutlaq and... a Mukasir and a Ma'dhun and a Da'i. These three people will be with him. Wa hadhihi al-maratib mahfuzah la tanqati'u ma'a kulli natiqin fi dawrihi (And these ranks are preserved; they are not cut off with every Natiq in his epoch). And these ranks, the three ranks, Mukasir, Ma'dhun, and Da'i, they are preserved ranks, that they... they will not be cut off with any Natiq, with... in his epoch. And with the Wasi, in his epoch. And with the Imam, in his epoch. That is, with every Natiq, these three ranks will remain. Mukasir, Ma'dhun, and Da'i. And with the Imam, they will remain, and with his Wasi, they will remain. And in this way, it will happen. Thumma inna kulla da'in amara ahla jaziratihi an yatazawwaja kulla wahidin minhum (Then every da'i commanded the people of his island that each one of them should marry). Then every da'i commanded the people of his island that they should marry, each one of them, bil-untha allati takawwanat fi magharati ghayrihi (the female who was formed in a cavern other than his). A woman such that who was born from a cavern different from his. Wa tazawwaja ghayruhu unthahu (And another married his female). And he should marry a woman other than her. Allati zaharat min magharatihi (Who emerged from his cavern). And the one who was born from his own cavern, min fudlati ma'ihi (from the remnant of his water), from his leftover water. Fa-hiya lahu ka-ukhtin (So she is like a sister to him). So she is like his sister. That is, from one cavern, first *dhukur* (males) were born. Men were born. As the Quran says, `ar-rijalu qawwamuna 'ala an-nisa'` (Men are the protectors and maintainers of women). Men have virtue over women or are strong. So, in the same way, here men were born first, and later, the remaining water, from it women were born. And the women who were born, they were the sisters of the men who were born. La yahillu lahu nikahuha (It is not lawful for him to marry her). And it is not lawful for them to marry them. Hadha tariq ahl al-haqq (This is the way of the People of Truth). At-tahirat al-munazzahah (The pure and the unblemished). And this is the pure and clean way, which is unblemished. Fa-'aqiduha la ma'taqaduhu al-jahilah min ahl az-zahir (So its believers are not what the ignorant from the people of the exoteric believe). It is not that belief which the ignorant people of the exoteric hold, that, min an... Adam 'alayhis-salam (that Adam, peace be upon him). That Adam 'alayhis-salam, zawwaja wiladat al-batn al-awwal min batn ath-thani (married the birth of the first womb to the birth of the second womb). That Adam 'alayhis-salam made them marry... the one who was from the first womb, with... with the birth of the second womb. That is, the children who were born from one wife, he had them marry the children of the second wife. Adam did. This is... the people of the exoteric hold this belief. Fa-yakunu an-nashr sifahan (So the progeny would be from incest). So if it is like this, then the propagation of humanity will be... all of them will be fornicators. Fa-na'udhu billah (So we seek refuge in Allah). So we seek refuge in Allah from this belief. Wa innama... sammaw ma lam ya'lamu haqiqatuhu was-sahihu ma qad dhakarnahu (And indeed... they named what they did not know its reality, and the correct account is what we have mentioned). And it is that what we have said, that is correct and based on reality. From which they... they did not mention it. Wal-hamdu lillahil-ladhi hadana li-hadha (And praise be to Allah who guided us to this). And praise be to Allah that He guided us to this matter. Wa ma kunna li-nahtadiya lawla an hadana Allah (And we would not have been guided had Allah not guided us). And if Allah had not guided us, then we could not have found guidance. Wa kanat hadhihi al-wiladah min al-ard daf'ah wahidah (And this birth from the earth was a single event). And this birth that happened, from the earth, it happened in one single event. La ghayr (And no other). In this way, the *mubdi' ta'ala* had brought into existence all the *mubda'at* (creations) in one go. In the same way, here, the births that happened from the caverns, in the first epoch (*awwal al-kawr*), it happened in one go. It did not happen a second time. Yes. Wa raja'at... (And it returned...). Wa raja'at min at-tanasul bayna ar-rajuli wan-nisa' (And it returned from procreation between the man and the woman). And after that, until now... after that, the births that have happened, of humans, they have happened from man and woman. Until today, the births that are happening, they are happening from man and woman. Yes.
The men and women who were born, what was the ratio of their purity? The ones who fell from there. So, men and women... men are more excellent, and women... how did they get the excellence, the men, and why are the women...
It will have to be seen, it hasn't come up in my reading, what was the reason for it. But it could be that in repentance, there was a difference. There must be some reason. There must be some reason that the preference that was given to men... that... why was it attained? From the beginning? That first the men were... from the pit... then the women. Yes, that is. The reason for that, what is it? The men who were granted excellence, that they were born first. And then what is the excellence? So it is that in our era, the believing women who are there, who are very pure and clean, in their worship they create their own perfection, and their action is purely for Allah, so for them it is said that they gradually become men in the *karr* (cycles). In the coming *karr*s, they are made men. Due to their own worship. This has also been said.
This ratio will always remain. So in place of that woman, they bring another one to the pit.
Yes. The one who has risen. So...
Women are a necessity of the world.
Yes. Yes. But it happens *illa ma sha' Allah* (except as Allah wills). That is, they are not that many. They are very few. Those who rise, the women.
They must be special ones.
Yes. Just as Sulayman bin Hasan said for his wife, that `kanat hiya dhukur` (she was male). That my wife, Khadijah bint Nuh, she is outwardly wearing the dress of a woman, but she is a man. He said this about her.
Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. You can also ask questions in between if you want to ask anything.
Bismillah al-Rahman al-Rahim. Balligh Allahumma ashraf ash-sharfi wal-fath, tahiyyatan wasilatan saniyyatan zakiyyatan mardiyyatan ila hadarati jami' al-anbiya' wal-mursalin, 'ala ila hadrati Sayyidna al-Mu'ayyad 'Imad ad-Din billah bin... Nuh ash-Shirazi, qaddasallahu ruhahu wa nawwara darihahu wa da'afa lana min barakatihi wa lahadatihi wa ta'idatihi. Wa taqabbal minna al-ifadah wal-istifadah bi-ahsani ma yakun bi-haqqi Muhammadin wa 'ala aalihi Sayyidina Muhammadin wa barik wa sallim. Al-Fatiha.
Bismillah...
Ihdina as-sirat al-mustaqim, sirat alladhina an'amta 'alayhim.
Wa bi-niyyat Sayyidi al-Maula al-Muslih al-Mutlaq bin Jabir bin 'Abd al-Malik an-Nadhif, min diyar ash-sharq ila diyar as-sham, al-'alim bil-kharij ash-sharif, wa khusam ad-din Maula Ghulam Husayn bin Sayyid Muslim al-muqaddas fi arwah al-muwahhidin... Fathullah Ta'ala ba'da na't... `ala an ya'khudhu bi-yadna wa yuhibbuna wa yuhibbi... min sharri jami' al-amrad wal-asqam wa min sharri al-hawamm wa min sharri al-ghayl wal-ladad wa min sharri al-bu'usat was-sufat wal-qiranat was-sa'at wal... wal-muhadarat wa ghayr dhalika min an-nahs... wa yahfadhuna min kulli amrihi wa yabdu... qalbuhu ma wada... ya'mihi fi... `izzatin rabbaniyyah shasha'aniyyah wa matta'anallahu bi-tuli hayatihi wa fi 'ala mukhanid-darajat... shukran 'alaykum li-hasadi da'awati... wa razzaqana iyyakum ma dumat... bi-jah Sayyidina Muhammadin wa aalihi Maulaana wa barakatihi salawati wa salam. Al-Fatiha.
Bismillah... Ihdina as-sirat al-mustaqim, sirat alladhina an'amta 'alayhim.
I also... I also...
