...the weather is good, people there also like it. And in the summers, there used to be a lot of trouble. Yes, that's right. Have you ever come this way, Ansaar bhai, towards America? No, Asif bhai. I never got the opportunity. Never got the opportunity. From my side, brother, you have a full, permanent invitation, Ansaar bhai. Most welcome. Yes, yes, yes, Alhamdulillah. Alhamdulillah, Asif bhai. Thank you very much. Insha'Allah, if Allah wills. Yes. Absolutely, if you happen to come this way, my house is available. So, I will be very happy if you come. Yes. Yes, yes, yes, Insha'Allah, Insha'Allah. Let's see, if Allah ever bestows the opportunity, then... Yes, absolutely. If I get the opportunity to sit and study face to face with you, Ansaar bhai, then that would be jannat (paradise). Ah ha. Yes, Alhamdulillah. Alhamdulillah. This is your kindness, brother. No, no, it is your favor, brother, that you are taking out so much time for me. Ansaar bhai, there are some questions that I have collected from a friend [unclear]. Yes, yes, yes. I need a little verification on this, regarding these asbaaq of Abdullah bhai. I can't understand if he has said something wrong, because Zahid bhai is saying that... ...Mujahid bhai told me to ask Ansaar bhai because this thing doesn't seem quite right. He said in a sabab (lesson) that, this Bayt al-Lahm... Yes, Bayt al-Lahm, yes... that from the gunaah (sin) of a mo'min, a kaafir is created. He says that the kaafir has no wujud (existence), that the gunaah (sin) we commit, Allah ta'ala gives it the shakl (shape) in the soorat (form) of a kaafir. This seems like a completely new thing. That's what Zahid bhai was also saying, that... Yes, this is a completely new thing. When a mo'min commits a gunaah (sin), he receives saza (punishment) for his sin. Yes. That is in its own place. Yes. And its kaffara (atonement)... and then when he is punished, its kaffaras are prepared. The stains that have come upon his nafs, all of that is cleansed. The grief of [losing] one's aulaad is in it... ...and inside his jism (body), the things that happen with his jism, through that he is cleansed. Yes. And he has to bear its punishment. Yes. Yes. Physical... body... if some nuqs (defect) comes in the body, if some illnesses come in the body. Yes. Through that, he is cleansed. Right. So in this, a kaafir being created, this seems like a new, strange thing to me, I have never read this anywhere. Okay, that's it. I heard it once from Mawla Ali Muqaddas. Yes. Then he has said this from his own side. Because Zahid bhai was also saying that if this is the case, then in the Alam-e-Ruhani, the very wujud (existence) of the shaak wa mutahayyir and musirr wa mustakbir sort of gets finished, if we accept this. It gets finished. That's right. Right, absolutely right. His, Zahid bhai's point also seems completely proper. I was also about to say the same thing to you, that if this is so, then the army of shaak wa mutahayyirin that is in it, the army upon army of musirr wa mustakbirin that is in it, then this whole jahaan is filled with these people. Yes. And on top of that, the kuffar who will be created from the sins of the mo'minin, then what is happening and what is going to happen? When will the cleansing happen? Okay Ansaar bhai, you know what the scary part is, that he didn't just say this as a sentence and move on. He spoke on this for about half an hour. So he speaks with so much confidence that one gets a little worried, I also get worried that this might not be correct. It creates a lot of confusion that he speaks with so much confidence. Yes, yes. No, so they try to make people agree with their point from somewhere or the other. Yes, exactly. They say it incorrectly, but they try to make people agree. [unclear] their [unclear] is this theory that if you repeat one thing so many times, the person in front will understand that yes, this is correct. Correct, correct. Okay, the second one. Otherwise, I didn't understand the point. The second thing he said is that the Naatiq is saahib-e-naasut. And the Imam is saahib-e-naasut wa laahut, both. Is this correct? The Imam's? Please repeat. He is saying that the Imam is saahib-e-naasut and saahib-e-laahut. Which is correct. Yes. But he said that all the Nutqa' - Adam, Nuh, Ibrahim (alayhis salam), all of them - were only saahib-e-naasut, they were not saahib-e-laahut. Look, as far as the ambiya are concerned. Yes. The ambiya are indeed saahib-e-naasut. But the nutqa' who are there, the nutqa' meaning these five who are called nutqa' - Adam, Nuh, Ibrahim, Musa, Isa, and Rasulullah. Yes. These ones, their darja (rank) is the darja of a Rasul, the darja of Messengers. Meaning they brought a new shari'at. Yes. So such people are both saahib-e-naasut and laahut, both. Okay. Yes. The rest of the other ambiya, as mentioned in the Qur'an-e-Majeed, there are some 25-26 ambiya, there is Yaqub, Yusuf, Yunus, Ayub, Zakariyya, Sulaiman, Dawood. Yes, yes. So these, such ambiya are called ambiya. Right. Yes. Naba, naba means to give news. Yes, yes. So these ambiya, they carry forward the shari'at of those Rasuls. Yes. They keep the Da'wat-e-Haq established. Yes, yes. Understood? Yes. So these, such ambiya, they are saahib-e-naasut. Because they are from among the mustawda'in, aren't they. Yes, yes. My question is this, that the naasut is the mijma' (collection) of rihyaat, and the laahut is the mijma' (collection) of suwaraat. Now, Sayyidna Ziya' Ali Muqaddas had stated that when the naasut and laahut of the Imam is formed, then whatever maqaam (station) the soorat takes in the laahut, for example if it took the maqaam of the eye, the maqaam of the left eye in the laahut, then in the naasut as well, it will take the maqaam of the left eye with it. So if all the ambiya (alayhimus salam) are only saahib-e-naasut, then their laahut, I mean this is a correspondence, a co-relation, isn't it, between laahut and naasut, so then here it becomes a matter of only rihyaat. Where did their corresponding suwaraat go then? Their suwaraat become attached only to the Imam, so those matters come face to face before them. So then in a way, all the ambiya are the hijaab (veil) of the Imam? Because naasut is that, isn't it? Yes. In one sense, you can also call them a hijaab. Okay, so meaning the laahut, the Imam, whichever Imam was working in the background, he had it. And the naasut, meaning these were the hijaab of the Imam of that time. Yes, yes. Okay. The Imam of that time... Is there any difference between hijaab and naasut? Because Mawla... in the sabab of Hazrat Ibrahim, I was listening to this sabab, Risala al-Haawiya 'ala Ma'na al-Jasima, these asbaaq that you had given in Rajab 2008. In that, you had stated that Mawlana Ali's naasut, the naasut-e-taba'i, was very high. It was equivalent to the naasut-e-khaas of other a'imma. So for this reason, Mawlana Ali had to lower his own. So first you took the naasut-e-tanaasuli, but that too performed a very high function. So then you took the hijaab-e-naasut-e-tanaasuli, but that too was high. So you took the hijaab-e-hijaab-e-tanaasuli. The point... there is one thing which is the standard, the naasut-e-taba'i, through which the Imam performs tashakhkhus (identification). Then after that, he lowers it, lowers it. So that is called, I mean even until then the term naasut is used. But then after a certain level, after coming down further, the word hijaab is used. So I was thinking, what is the difference between the two? Between hijaab and naasut? Naasut-e-tanaasul? Yes. What is the difference between hijaab and naasut? No, there is no difference. Same. That naasut is the hijaab. That is the hijaab. Okay. That is the hijaab. Yes. Now, through which naasut they manifest themselves, that is, through which hijaab they manifest themselves, that depends on the Imam. Just as we change our qamis (shirt) day and night, right? Yes, yes. Like we see in movies, the hero, the heroine, that in a day, in one film, she changes fifty dresses. Yes, yes. Isn't it? Yes, yes. Similarly, the Imam (alayhis salam), he changes his naasut, or hijaabaat, like that. Right. And... Like I gave you such an easy example, yes, yes. But just for understanding. Just as we change our qamis, similarly the Imam (alayhis salam) changes his hijaab. At whichever time, through whichever hijaab he has to deal with the follower, has to create an effect, through that hijaab, he clears his matters. And this, and any one form, like the case of Hazrat Ubayy ibn Ka'b, that you, the Prophet (alayhis salam), your own personality was also present at that time, in the era of Rasul-e-Akram, and then you yourself were also a hijaab. Meaning you were doing both things at the same time. So, meaning this is also possible, which means that there, he can perform tashakhkhus with more than one. Absolutely. At one time, there are a thousand hijaabs. Right. At any time, he can manifest through any hijaab. As you may have heard an incident about Mawlana Ali, yes, that you, you led the prayer in a mosque in Kufa. Yes. Yes. Now, after leading the prayer, you came out, you came out into the market. So in the market, no one greeted you. You passed through various markets. Yes. So no one greeted you. Okay. So those who were with you, yes. So those companions who had prayed with you in the mosque of Kufa, they started saying, 'Mawlana, look what kind of people are here. They don't even greet you.' Yes. So then Mawlana Ali said, 'Ask them who led the Fajr prayer for them?' Okay. Okay. Meaning you were in all the mosques of Kufa, your hijaabaat. Okay. Behind whom people offered prayers. In different mosques. There must have been many mosques in Kufa. Just as there are many mosques in our city. Yes, yes, yes. So Kufa had many mosques. In which your hijaabaat led the prayers. Yes, yes. Now when you have already met in the market, there is no need to greet again and again. We meet in the office in the morning, if we met in the morning at Fajr, then if we meet all the time... ...if we meet all the time, we don't say 'Good morning, good morning' to him again and again. Yes, yes, yes. Subhanallah. Right. Yes. So this, this is perfectly clear. Yes. Okay Ansaar bhai, this which, in the Alam-e-Ruhani when the first creation in tawhid... and tawhid [unclear] so to him, that [unclear] to him was the knowledge of ma kaana saya'kun (what was and what will be). Yes. And, so in this I have one question, that, look, saya'kun is the knowledge of what will be. Meaning, he was told how many anwaar there will be, how things will descend, and how they will ascend back in a good state, that entire knowledge from beginning to end was bestowed upon him. But ma kaana, which is of the past, of the maazi, I mean, the knowledge of the past that was given to him, at that point nothing had even happened. So then what is the knowledge of the past? Saya'kun is understandable, because that is yet to happen. He... the anwaaraat (lights) that he received from the mumba'ith-e-thani, the anwaar that he received, through them he got this idea, he came to know, that, what were the matters, what matters had occurred. But no matters had occurred, Ansaar bhai, before that. That matter, he himself is the first creation [unclear]. No, so this knowledge he obtained that 'min la shayin, wa la fi shayin, wa la bi shayin, wa la... wa la ma'a shayin' (from nothing, and not in anything, and not by anything, and not... and not with anything). All these... nothing existed. Yes. Mujde [unclear]... 'wa la fi zamaan wa la makaan' (and not in time and not in space). Yes. Subhanallah. Yes. Yes. I was just... perhaps he too, he too obtained that knowledge, like that. Okay, okay, okay. Subhanallah. Yes, yes ji, yes ji. Okay Ansaar bhai, this which we have from the usul-e-da'wat, that the Imam (alayhis salam), when he undergoes taraqqi (progression), he progresses with his mijma' (collection), meaning with laahut and naasut, right, in the falak-e-a'zam. Is this principle applicable everywhere from beginning to end? Absolutely. The silsila (process) is ongoing. So, the Mawr-e-Awwal, the sakht-e-faadil, or that first jus' that was created, which became murtafa' (ascended) as soon as it was created. So as it has been told to us, that the way suwaraat are formed, that the Imam-e-Da'wat calls, after that the mo'minin accept, an ilmi soorat is formed, an amali soorat is formed, and then it goes into his laahut. But now this Mawr-e-Awwal, this is the same kind of ma kaana question, but that now the first person of the Mawr-e-Awwal is manifesting. So now the mo'minin are manifesting for the first time, there is no knowledge, the first generation. Their laahut and naasut, what was that like? It was so exalted, its nazaamat (excellence) in the Mawr-e-Awwal, this which is called juz' al-kull, Alam-e-Ida'iyya... called Alam-e-Bida'iyya, which... which is called Qaymuruth, its nazaamat was so exalted... ...that it was absolutely like the matters of the Kalimah. Even higher than the Kalimah. Yes. But in this realm, they had to... had to come. In this realm, yes, they had to come into this realm, so that they could begin all the matters of this realm, of this universe, which are to happen later. Yes, yes. Did you understand? Yes, yes. So they came, then from them their walad-e-kaam was born, from them their walad-e-kaam was born. Because they, they were born from a Hujjat, weren't they. Yes, yes, yes. They were born from a Hujjat. And after that, the second birth took place, their walad-e-kaam was born. Yes. All the matters related to that, how did they proceed? The way they proceed with us today, like a man and a woman get married, and from that, the chains of progeny continue. Yes, yes. So you had to continue this chain. Right. Yes. So that is why they came into this world. Yes. Right? Yes. But your nazaamat was so high, the nazaamat of that Alam-e-Bida'iyya was of such an exalted degree, you could say it was like the Ark of the Covenant or the Preserved Tablet. Yes. Understood? Yes. But, because now this disobedient and exalted one was commanded to, 'Brother, create this universe and in it, now all these deficient ones, that is, the musirr wa mustakbirin, the naadimin wa mutahayyirin, the lower class, and the musirr... the shaak wa mutahayyirin, now make a factory for their cleansing. Yes. And a, a hospital.' In which all the patients will be kept and they, they will be treated. Yes, yes. So yes, so this, creating a universe was the objective, which is why, this person of bida'iyya, or Alam-e-Bida'iyya, or what was called Qaymuruth, they came into this world. And the birth that happened from the Hujjat, the first birth, as it should have been. Yes. And after that, then through you, this walad-e-kaam of yours was born. And from the walad-e-kaam, these chains of imamat are continuing. Okay. This chain of imamat had to be continued. And now this one birth, one, the beginning and end of everything is unique. So this beginning was unique in that the birth was from a Hujjat. Yes, yes, yes. And after that, then that chain continued, as we see today, a man and a woman get married, and from their marriage, these children are born, the chain of progeny continues. So when you became murtafa' (ascended), so yes, they, they, so when they became murtafa', they immediately took the place of Aashir. And Aashir went above them. Okay. Meaning their any... They had no laahut? No, no, no. Okay. So they became the leader. Meaning their, meaning they, they became the leader. Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely. Yes, yes. Now they joined the mijma' of Aashir, rather they became Aashir. And they, and Aashir reached the ninth degree, the last part of the degree of the ninth intellect. He joined with them. Right. Now, because he also has to progress, right? Aashir also has to progress, everyone has to progress. Yes. Yes. We say Aashir, Aashir, he is not the same Aashir whose mention we have been hearing from the beginning, that Aashir was told to create Adam. So the poor guy remains there and keeps working hard, but then where is the progression? Right. And this... Yes, so this Alam-e-Bida'iyya, it progressed and took the place of Aashir. Just like there is a bank manager, yes, yes, if that manager has retired, then another person from below is made the manager in his place, right? Yes, yes. Yes, yes. And now he will be called the manager, he won't be called a cashier or that. Rather, he will be called the manager. His rank has become higher, hasn't it. Right. And Ansaar bhai, those 13 questions of haqa'iq and in the risala of Sayyidna Ali Sahab, in that, the thing that I have understood correctly is that Aashir too, he now, meaning Aashir and the entire group up to the third intellect, they have all reached the daa'ira (circle) of the mumba'ith-e-thani, this mumba'ith-e-awwal. Meaning now they, because you had also said that it took them a period of one qawr (cycle/epoch), approximately, in which if you look at it from a worldly perspective, that they progressed, so meaning now at this time, all of them are, what do you call it, present in the daa'ira of the mumba'ith-e-awwal. And, and, is this correct? No, it is wrong. This entire world, Mawlana Zain al-'Abidin (alayhis salam) states that the entire world will be cleansed in 10 mawrs. Yes. In 10 mawrs. Yes. Right now, we are in the second mawr. Right. We are in the second mawr right now. There is still a lot of time. Okay, okay. So meaning those, these in the chain of the dawa'ir, the dawa'ir of the uqul, they will keep going on now? Okay. Yes, yes. And then on that day, whenever the entire world is cleansed, yes, then, at that time, all of them will gather near this mumba'ith-e-awwal, in their circle. 'Jannat al-Ma'wa inda Sidrat al-Muntaha' (The Garden of Abode, near the Lote-tree of the utmost boundary). Okay. So meaning right now, all these dawa'ir of the uqul are present? Very much present. But in their own eras, they are progressing and moving forward. Okay. As I just submitted to you regarding Aashir. Yes, yes, yes. So yes, that Aashir joined with the last part of the circle of the ninth intellect. And that last part went even higher. Yes. It went even higher. In this way, all these chains, this chain of the dawa'ir will continue. Everyone will keep gathering near Mawla mumba'ith-e-awwal. Yes. Look, in al-Anwaar al-Latifa it is stated that their haqiqi khalifa (true successor) will be, the first Adam-e-Bida'iyya of the Mawr-e-Awwal, their haqiqi khalifa will be the Qaa'im of the final mawr. Who will be their haqiqi khalifa. All the rest who come in between, they will all be juzwi (partial). And this entire mijma' (collection) of 10 mawrs will ascend together at the end. Isn't it? So it's possible that for them, it's such that matters of progression should not stop like this. They will keep moving forward. As I just submitted to you that brother, that [unclear]. Yes. Otherwise, it will be a very long wait. Yes, yes. So then they will keep gathering everyone in one place like that. They will make them wait. So how will those matters of further progression take shape, brother? Okay, okay. This is for some time, somewhere or the other for them, this is called a'raaf, a'raaf. Yes, yes. This a'raaf, right, like that a'raaf, meaning a place to stay. Yes, yes. So they stay for some time. Okay. Meaning they stay for this reason, that they are engaged in the effort to make the ones below ascend. Okay. Yes. And when those matters are completed, they take their fellow community members and ascend. So, meaning when, like Mawlana Ali said, when the sword of Ibne Muljim struck him, on the neck, what did you say then? 'Fuztu wa Rabbil Ka'bah' (I have succeeded, by the Lord of the Ka'bah). This one sentence, to this day, has not come from anyone's tongue. Yes, yes. Yes. That 'Fuztu wa Rabbil Ka'bah.' That by the oath of the Lord of the Ka'bah, today I have succeeded. Yes. So what success was there in this? This was shahadat (martyrdom). Right. What was the matter of success in this? Outwardly, the point is not understandable. Right. That the real point is that whatever matters were with you, of qisaas (retribution) or whatever all the matters were, they were completed today. Right. Now no qisaas remains, now you have to progress further. Until now, you were waiting. Yes. Until the qisaas are completed, until these matters are completed through some or the other of your hijaab, until then you have to wait here. Right. And after that, you will progress. So then you progressed. So there is no that. Right. Now when the second mawr comes, the saahib-e-mawr, then this first mawr will progress with its mijma'. It will progress, absolutely. And the second one who comes, he will then take the place of Aashir. As I just submitted. Yes, yes, absolutely. The one from the second mawr will come, so he will be born from a Hujjat. Alhamdulillah, I have understood. At every qawr, at every qawr there is a birth from a Hujjat. Yes. Yes, and similarly it happens at every mawr too. Ansaar bhai... That, this is the very thing that Allah ta'ala states in Surah Takwir, 'idh al-shamsu kuwwirat' (When the sun is wound round). Right. Yes. What is its meaning? This is its meaning. When the sun will be blinded... when the sun, yes, will be blinded, which outwardly these people in the general public have said that the sun will become dark, and all the stars will fall, the terrifying mention they make of the matters of Qiyamah. All that is fine in its own place. But the words of the outward people are in their place, with us, the people of da'wat-e-haqq state that the shams, meaning, will complete one qawr. The shams, when it completes one qawr, its services will be completed. Right. The shams will come swiftly to the earth and will progress with swiftness. Because its services have been completed. A lot, it performed the services of one qawr. Yes, so now it will come swiftly and this, the progression cannot be in such a despicable form. It will come swiftly, and will enter a state of peace. But it will progress swiftly. It will progress very swiftly. Not like us, where a mo'min for his whole life, until the age of 60-70, is in the state of a mo'min, and our shortcomings are there, mistakes are in their place, sins are in their place, and all matters proceed slowly, and who knows when yaumun-naas will be, when our cleansing will happen, what will happen. But these people, they do it swiftly. As we see even before us, we see the munaasib, we see the du'at. Yes. Aren't they? That how swiftly, brother, he is a mo'min, today, come, make him a Mulla. The Mulla became, he was made a Mulla. So they became Mulla, then after that they came to Aala Hudur. Then what? They became an aamil of some degree. Right. They became an aamil, then they acquired knowledge on their own, and became more. Hazrat Saqir Shah Muqaddas was at the fourth degree in the hudur. Yes. They used to call him Mulla Saqir, Mulla Saqir. Yes, and no one even had the thought that the na's of mansusiyyat would come upon him. Okay. Subhanallah. Yes, everyone used to think that there is Ziya'li Sahab or there are others too, their ranks are very high, the na's will come upon them. But the world saw that the fourth in the hudur, whom they used to call Mulla Saqir, Mulla Saqir, the na's came upon him. Okay, okay, okay. Subhanallah. Yes. This is an example from right in front of us. So how swiftly it happened. So that is swift progression. Okay. Yes. So these are the things that happen. Progression happens in this way, they keep moving forward. Ansaar bhai, when the sun, as you just mentioned about the shams, then its khilafat will also be established, right? Some, meaning some sayyarah (planet) will take its place? Yes, it is certain. Look, every single thing in the entire universe has to be cleansed. Now, at what time, who will take whose place at what time, all those matters, as we keep acquiring more knowledge, meaning yours and these sciences of haqa'iq, as we keep acquiring them, we will get an idea of who will take whose place when. Okay Ansaar bhai, just now you mentioned the incident of Mawlana Ali's shahadat, so I remembered something Sadullah bhai said. It's good, let me confirm that with you too. He said a very strange thing. He said that the sword of Ibn-e-Muljim that struck Mawlana Ali's head. ...in reality, Husain's head was there. Is this correct? What a thing! Now, if they are speaking from some perspective of hijaabaat, then that is in its own place. But I don't understand this point. These things are matters of the hijaabaat of people lower than oneself. Yes, yes. An Imam coming to that level and becoming their hijaab, this is not understandable. Yes. Fidiya... An Imam becoming a fidiya for someone, that is, that is a strange thing. And no mansub has ever said this in any sabab. So for this reason... No, no, no, no. Okay. Just as in connection with Mawlana Husain, his hijaabaat are mentioned, yes, yes, so they state that Muslim ibn Aqil became a hijaab at times, at times Hani ibn Urwah became a hijaab, and in the end, Mawlana Abbas became a hijaab. Now all of these were of a lower rank than Mawlana Husain, right? Yes, yes, yes. Lower in rank than the Imam, and his soldiers, the sipaah, are of a lower rank. Absolutely. Mawlana Ja'far al-Sadiq (alayhis salam), when he designated the fidiya for his son Mawlana Ismail, even in that era, you saw that many, meaning he called the du'at. He called them to his majlis and stated that I am going through such and such matters, and who is ready to become the fidiya for my son Mawlana Ismail? So all the people became ready and everyone raised their hands, 'Yes, we are ready to become Ismail's fidiya, we are ready.' But far away in the majlis, in a corner, a personality was sitting, whose name was Quraish ibn Ahmad. Yes. He was sitting there, poor man, he didn't even raise his hand, just sitting with his head bowed, crying. Yes. And Ja'far al-Sadiq (alayhis salam) saw and from afar said to you, 'O aahna, O aanas, that's enough.' You, you have been chosen, you have been chosen. Look, this is the selection, this is the humility. Yes. And, as the Rasul says, that whoever displays humility, Allah ta'ala, 'man tawaada'a lillahi rafa'ahullah' (whoever humbles himself for Allah, Allah raises him). Allah ta'ala elevates him. Whoever expresses humility, Allah ta'ala elevates him in his rank. So there, he did not raise his hand, but rather that I am such a lowly, lowliest man, and can I become the fidiya of Ismail, of Mawlana Ismail? Yes. So he expressed this humility, Allah liked it. Mawlana Ja'far al-Sadiq (alayhis salam) liked his words and this deed of his, and he chose you. Right. And he said, 'Aanas, that's enough.' And then he called him and blew into his ear. Perhaps after reciting a few prayers, he blew into his ear. So in an instant, his appearance became just like Mawlana Ismail's. Okay. He became his fidiya, he became his hijaab. And the world saw that the one who fell ill, that of Ismail, he was made ill. So when he fell ill, it was Quraish ibn Ahmad who, all the matters, through him, the death also occurred, it was his. When he was buried, it was he who was buried. And Ismail, he... ...Mawlana Ja'far al-Sadiq (alayhis salam) saved him in Kufa and took him into his protection. These are the kinds of matters that happen, brother. Right. So an Imam becoming the hijaab of an Imam, this point is not understandable at all. It's very difficult, Ansaar bhai, you know, when I listen to Sadullah bhai's asbaaq, my mind gets so burdened, understanding, because all the time I have to process whether he said it right or wrong, right or wrong. No, so you should avoid it. I would say... I yes, Zahid bhai has now stopped sending them to me. I mean, one shouldn't say this. But if the mind is getting spoiled like this, then it is better not to listen. Absolutely, and Zahid bhai to me... But look, look, I... ...I am saying this, I am also saying this because if the tasawwur (conception/perception) gets spoiled, then we will fall into even greater loss. Hmm. Understood? So the tasawwur got spoiled, and on that tasawwur we kept moving ourselves forward. Hmm hmm. So when the tasawwur itself got spoiled, a mo'min's tasawwur got spoiled, then it's over, the whole matter is finished. Right. No, Zahid bhai also told me the same thing, 'Asif, I won't send you Sadullah bhai's asbaaq anymore because he, you should clear these questions of yours with Ansaar bhai. But after that, the thing is that he is creating so much confusion that it's better you don't listen to his asbaaq.' I said, 'Yes, that's right, because...' No, Zahid bhai also, Zahid bhai should also not give such asbaaq, brother. Yes. He said the same, 'Now I won't send them.' Sending, yes, yes. Okay Ansaar bhai, this on Ghadir-e-Khumm, on Yaum-e-Ghadir when the Prophet (alayhis salam) performed the na's, Mawlana Ali received many majma'. In that, one majma' is aql-e-muhiti. What is this? One majma' what? He received aql-e-muhiti, it is told. Aql-e-muhiti? No, I didn't understand what you said. The majma' that, I... The majma' that were given to Mawlana Ali, in them it is said that the name of one of them was aql-e-muhiti, or muhit, or muhiti. I don't know for sure, it's muhit. Just like there is falak-e-muhit, in that way aql-e-muhit, or muhiti. No, something like that... I didn't understand the point, I didn't understand the point at all. I have never heard anything like that. Okay. Then Sadullah bhai must have said this, that he... Many, he received many majma', that is true. Yes. But aql-e-muhiti... No, there is no such thing. He didn't receive anything by that name. Okay. Look, I don't know where they bring this from. Okay, then... Ansaar bhai, this, with us in the suwaraat, there are kulli suwar and juzwi suwar. Meaning, when, like Hazrat Ibrahim had explained it this way, that where there were 10,000, there became 1,000. Where there were 1,000, there became 100. At 100 it became 10, at 10 it became one. So, for this kulli suwar, is there any fixed number, that if, as it was told, that the Prophet (alayhis salam) received a kulli surat, then inside one kulli surat, how many suwaraat are there, is there any such definition? No, there is no such specific definition. But it is told that, brother, the daur-e-kashf, as was stated for Mawlana Ali, that all the qaa'im of the daur-e-kashf... ...their forms, the matters that occurred in the daur-e-fatrat, their forms, and the daur-e-satr. So in this way, there were 6 daur-e-kashf and 6 daur-e-fatrat, yes, like that. All their qaa'im. Now, with every qaa'im, every 1,000 years has one qaa'im. And in one, in 1,000 years, how many imams were there? Yes, yes. All those imams get absorbed into the qaa'im. Right. There were many such qaa'ims. In 50,000 years, there were 50 qaa'ims. So how many forms were there? Right. So there cannot be any, any number for them. So meaning all, all this which we called sitta suwar. Yes. All these 6 daur-e-kashf and 6 daur-e-fatrat, and the 6 daur-e-satrat etc., the mijma' (collection) of all their qawa'im gathered with Ali. Right. So Ali, in one sense, is also saahib-e-juzwi. So we will call these sitta suwaraat, kulli suwar, right? 6 kulli suwar? Yes, yes, these will be called kulli suwar. Okay. And all those under them are juzwi suwar. Yes. Yes, yes. Okay. Okay, these suwaraat, as it has been stated, like for Mawlana Ali on Yaum-e-Ghadir, you received so many majma'. So here, who gathers the majma'? The hijab or the mohtajib? Who gathers, meaning? Meaning, who receives them? Because it often happens that the word Ali is used but the talk is about 'ayn. Sometimes 'ayn-e-uzma is mentioned, but the talk is about Ali. So these matters that come... From the mohtajib, higher things are received. This collection of forms is gathered from below. Like now it was said for Mawlana Ali that you received so many majma', so did the hijab receive them? They were gathered through his hijab. Meaning all those of lower rank than him, all those hijabaat kept gathering with him. As it is also said for a mo'min, that when a mo'min passes away... ...then his form, meaning his nafs-e-naatiqa, takes the nafs-e-uswaa and where does it go? To his Hajjat-e-Ali. It stays in his hijab, it stays in his vicinity. And then when that Hajjat-e-Ali passes away, he becomes a hijab with him. And then he goes to the Hajjat-e-Ali above him. So in this way, gathering from below, all the forms gather and go upwards. Then they gather near the Baab-ul-Abwaab. So the Baab-ul-Abwaab gathers all the forms and... ...in the laahut of the Imam, it gathers. So all the lower ones will gather the forms and leave, right. So meaning Ali gathered all these forms for 'ayn-e-uzma. Yes. Okay. And the mohtajib is 'ayn. And Ali is their hijab. Right. So they, yes, they gathered the collection of all forms for 'ayn. And... Because the da'wat is the da'wat of 'ayn that is going on, right. Yes. The da'wat that is of 'ayn, for the da'wat of 'ayn, all the forms have to be gathered. Absolutely. Okay Ansaar bhai, for the mohtajibin of the Prophet (alayhis salam), sometimes the word Ahmed is used, like in this risala that Hazrat Ibrahim read, everywhere the mention of zaat-e-Ahmediya (alayhis salam) is there. And then a word is used, Mim-e-Maryamiyya. So is this a mention of the same one or are these two different zawaat (personalities)? That, that is one and the same. It's the same thing. Whether you say Mim-e-Maryamiyya or Ahmediya, zaat-e-Ahmediya. Okay. These are all those mohtajibin. Mohtajibin. Okay. Okay Ansaar bhai, this Sadullah bhai, there was a good concept of 'ayn-e-awwala and 'ayn-e-aakhira, that the 'ayn-e-awwala, they progress and, now he has done a new thing... ...that this 'ayn, 'ayn-e-awwala and 'ayn-e-aakhira, are these two different zawaat, or is 'ayn-e-awwala itself progressing and becoming 'ayn-e-aakhira? No, different zawaat. 'Ayn-e-awwala is the personality of Ali. 'Ayn-e-awwala means the personality of Ali. And 'ayn-e-aakhira means the personality of the Qaa'im. Because the Qaa'im's name is also Ali. Right. Okay, so these are different zawaat. Yes, yes. And 'ayn-e-awwala will get absorbed into 'ayn-e-aakhira. Okay. Taking all the forms with them, Ali will join the laahut of the Qaa'im. And they will take the station of the heart. Right. Yes. Okay. So this is 'ayn-e-awwala and 'ayn-e-aakhira. That is why they say Fa-e-awwala and Fa-e-aakhira. Right. Okay. All these are the terms of the da'wat with us, these are terminologies. But these are all different, these are all different zawaat. Yes, yes. If you say Fa-e-awwala, it means Fatima, Mawlana Fatima, the daughter of Rasulullah. Yes. And if you say Fa-e-aakhira, it means the daughter of the Qaa'im (alayhis salam), because this wife. Okay. Look, now this... Her name will also be Fatima. Now what did he say... He said... Ali's, the Qaa'im's name will also be Ali and his wife's name will also be Fatima. Yes, yes, yes. Now what did he say, that Fa-e-awwala itself will progress and become Fa-e-aakhira. And Mim-e-awwala will progress and become Mim-e-aakhira. So in this way they confuse so much... Now, in their speaking, there has been some mistake. The rest is a matter of getting absorbed later on. They will get absorbed with them. Mawlana, like Ali, the collection of all forms that gathered with him, and when the Qaa'im manifests, he will take his entire collection and get absorbed into the laahut of the Qaa'im. This is a method of moving forward, of progressing. No, but Ansaar bhai, he is saying that now the, the assembly of the Qaa'im that is going to be held, that now again the same assembly, the same kind of prophet will come, Mim, that Mawlana Mehdi will come, Abul-Qaa'im will come, the Qaa'im will come. He is saying that the Prophet is now going to manifest as the Mehdi. Ali is now going to manifest as the Qaa'im. The Fa-e-awwala who is now coming as Fa-e-aakhira, she is the previous Fa-e-awwala. He is saying this. No, no, no. Their, either there is a difference in the understanding of the listener, or the speaker has made some mistake. Okay. And Allah knows best. Okay. This cannot happen, progression, what would you call progression, brother? What would you call moving forward? So the wait for the Qaa'im, what became of his matters, what was their meaning? Whereas we have been reading this, in all the books of haqa'iq we have read that Ali is 'ayn-e-awwala, and he, taking the collection of all forms with him, is going to join the presence of the Qaa'im. Meaning 'ayn-e-aakhira, and they will take the station of the heart. So this Ali and that Ali will be of one rank. Yes, absolutely, absolutely, right, right, right. It's a very big thing, man. Right. One has to move forward, to progress or not? Right. Either it's the listener's mistake, some mistake in understanding... I am repeating his words to you, these are his exact words. I, may Allah forgive me, brother. Okay. Final question, Ansaar bhai, very... Thank you, you are so patiently handling all my questions. Just one last question, and this is the most difficult, so I left it for the end. Now this, they in Kawaqib... in the asbaaq of al-Kawaqib al-Durriyah, they said one thing, that, as we read there, when the naadimin, shaak wa mutahayyirin, and musirr wa mustakbirin, their groups were formed, while falling. Right? So now they are saying that there is no such thing. This jo naadimin, they are saying that the group of musirr wa mustakbirin, a faction of this became naadim, a faction of this became shaak, and its last faction remained the same as the original. Meaning they... Absolutely, absolutely, a wrong conception. A completely wrong conception. He is saying that the naadimin... The Saahib-e-Anwaar has explained in detail that... ...that groups were formed. 70 groups were formed. There are 15 types of naadimin. And tell me about the types of naadimin too. From which forms were what things made? These kawaqib were made, the falak-e-muhit was made, the falak-e... all the aflaak were made, and all the matters that occurred. So 8-10 factions from the naadimin remained above. Yes. And we are at the fourth or fifteenth station. We have come into this world, we are enduring these troubles etc. He is saying that... And the faction of shaak wa mutahayyirin is separate. The one of musirr wa mustakbirin... That is why, that is why the Rasul said that my ummah will have 70 factions, 72 sections. So this, this is all talk of truth, man. He is saying that the naadimin are actually the taab-u-bi-tawbati. And the group below that is lubb-un-nida. He is saying this. And then the rest of the lower part, the falling group of musirr, in that, an upper section is of naadim, the middle one is of shaak, and... so much confusion... Just go on, I knew that... Absolutely, absolutely, today, completely reject today's conception. And the truth of the da'wat is that the naadimin, the musirr-mustakbirin are 15... ...the shaak wa mutahayyirin, they were formed right there, formed in the Alam-e-Ruhani. Yes. Absolutely, clear, the same. And they, at that time, until that time, they only had thoughts. Then they tried to break free on their own. When all these matters happened and the decree of Aashir was also revealed, so from the side of the first creation, matters occurred, so they tried to break free on their own. So in trying to break free, first length was created, yes, then breadth was created, then depth was created. Meaning length, breadth, and depth. Right. This was created. And the outward form took on wujud (existence). And in the Alam-e-Ruhani, there is no such thing as a body. Right. There wujud, but such things happened. Such, such volume was created. And then from there above, the command came from above that now these people are no longer fit to live here. Right. Now for them, make another place for them, where these people can be cleansed. Right. So they were cast down. Right. And this, this very thing has been explained in detail in the Qur'an-e-Majeed, and the verses of Surah al-hamd point to this very thing. Yes. 'Sirat alladhina an'amta 'alayhim' (The path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor). Yes. That O Allah, make me walk on the path of those upon whom You have bestowed favor, meaning the naadimin-mustakbirin. Right. 'Ghayril maghdubi 'alayhim' (Not of those who have evoked [Your] anger). And do not make me walk on the path of those upon whom Your wrath has descended. Right. Meaning the shaak wa mutahayyirin. Right. And not 'wa lad-daallin' (nor of those who are astray). And not on the path of those who are misguided, astray, meaning the musirr wa mustakbirin. With such detail, with such clarity, all things have been explained, and then they say that from the musirr wa mustakbirin these came out, those came out, these are completely wrong things. The very conception is becoming wrong. Hmm. Okay, Alhamdulillah. Jazakallah, Ansaar bhai, thank you very, very much. You have given me a lot of peace, clarifying all these things with you. And I will submit this to you, I will request that you do not read the asbaaq of Sadullah Mian. Yes. Absolutely. This should not go out in my name. No, no, no, absolutely. I understand completely. Because if there is so much confusion, then it is better not to know, that is better. It is better not to know than to know something wrong. Yes. Because all these things I am hearing for the first time from your mouth. Yes. I will to you... I will tell Zahid bhai about this, next time when you go to Hyderabad, I will tell you, give you this recording, this is a special recording which we, Javid bhai has also kept separately, I have also kept separately. In it, he has said all this. You can listen to it yourself. Oh, what will I, what will I do by listening to such things, man. Yes, you have a point too. I, I, I don't even want to listen. That's right. Absolutely right. Why should I spoil my tasawwur? Absolutely right. Alhamdulillah. Please do not take my name. Ansaar bhai, you don't worry at all. I to anyone... you, you don't know anything. You, no one even knows that you... I only... I am only saying this for the sake of your love, that your tasawwur should not be spoiled. If a mo'min's tasawwur is spoiled, then everything is finished. All, absolutely, I now will not... Please wait while we connect your call.
